
I
11
■
■
v\i^
& *
£ GENERAL LIBRARY m
$ University of Michigan i
* i
i£ Presented by in
s *
I «"
« *
* J
ij£ 100 ^
Al A
« i>

*«*v


\
s
-J
METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
v

!
N. I\ i
METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
f
-•-,
l7^-
>
METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
TV b /
AN ESSAY IN EPISTEMOLOGY
BY
WALTER gMITH, Ph.D.
PROFESSOR OF PHILOSOPHY IN LAKE FOREST UNIVERSITY
Neto gorft
THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
LONDON: MACMILLAN & CO., Ltd.
1899
AU righto reserved
COPYBIGHT, 1899,
By THE MACMILLAN COMPANY.
NottoooS $rtss
J. S. Cuihlng & Co. — Berwick it Smith
Norwood Mass. U.S.A.
PREFACE
Some parts of this work have already been pub-
lished in articles in the philosophical journals. The
germ of it is in an article that appeared in Mind
for October, 1895; and a few of the discussions
have beert presented in The Philosophical Review,
Education, and The International Journal of Ethics.
I wish to thank the editors of these journals for
the courtesy by which I have been allowed to make
use of this material. The portions of it which
have been selected have been in most cases con-
siderably changed.
I wish to express my indebtedness to my brother,
Professor William G. Smith, of Smith College, for
criticisms and suggestions.
WALTER SMITH.
Lake Forest University,
July, 1899.
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
PASS
1. The love of knowledge 1
2. Progress of modern science 2
3. The benefits of science 2
4. The conflict of science with morality, art, religion . . 3
5. The widespread influence of science .... 6
6. The need for a critical examination of knowledge . . 6
7. Has philosophy already made this criticism? . . . 7
8. The assumption of science and philosophy that know-
ledge consists in concepts 8
9. The need to examine this assumption .... 8
10. Psychology indispensable in this criticism ... 9
11. Result of this criticism anticipated 10
12. Misapprehension to be avoided 11
13. Plan of this investigation 12
CHAPTER I
Definition op Knowledge
1. A survey of epistemological theories necessary . . 14
2. Empedocles. "Like is known by like." This view of
knowledge characteristic of the Greek mind . . 14
3. Plato. Metaphysical theory. The vision of ideas. Unity
with the ideas 17
4. Aristotle's metaphysical theory. Definition of truth.
Knowledge by sense and by reason. Identity of thought with its object 19
6. The mysticism of Plotinus. Mysticism as a form of
knowledge-theory 21
vii
viii CONTENTS
PAGE
6. Transition to modern philosophy. Contrast of spirit
and nature 23
7. Modern agnosticism 24
8. Locke 24
9. Hume. Unknown cause of impressions. Philosophical
ideas of relation 24
10. Kant. Things in themselves unknown. The categories
are not knowledge of things in themselves. Hints toward another theory of knowledge ... 26
11. Later agnosticism 28
12. The agnostic view of knowledge 28
13. Absolute idealism. Hegel. T. H. Green ... 28
14. The element of truth in this view. Its neglect of the
problem, how individual persons and things are
known. Its treatment of matter .... 30 15. Theory of truth as consistency. Its inadequacy . . 33
16. Summary. Theories fall into two groups: one regards
knowledge of the noUself; the other self-knowledge . 34
17. Definition of knowledge 35
CHAPTER II
Sensation, Feeling, and Volition as Cognitive Factors
1. The unreflecting view of the cognitive value of sensation 37
2. Distrust of the senses 38
3. The transcendental and scientific grounds of this distrust 38
4. The extent to which the criticisms of sensation are valid 40
5. Sensation is cognitive of sensation. Sensations are facts;
not mere utilities or instruments of reason. Know-
ledge of them by what is like them .... 41
6. Importance of sensations as being facts of consciousness
and as largely constituting experience ... 44
7. The connection of sensation with self-knowledge . . 46
8. Feeling and volition as cognitive 47
9. Connection of the three factors to be studied ... 48
10. Relation of feeling to sensation. Study of mental growth
necessary. The emotions 48
CONTENTS
IX
11. Relation of volition to sensation. Attempts to identify
the two 61
12. Testimony of physiology to psychical continuity . 62
13. Evolution of mind 63
14. Meaning of psychical continuity 63
16. Evidence from this discussion that the mental elements
are intelligible and cognitive. Introduction to the
study of concepts 64
CHAPTER III
The Conceptual View of Knowledge
1. The history of this view to be presented .
2. Socrates. The concept used by earlier thinkers. Soc-
rates used it as the explanation of things .
3. Plato's idea. His treatment of sensation. His system
of ideas
4. Aristotle. His account of the relation between the indi-
vidual and the universal. His system of concepts. The place assigned to sensation ....
6. Later thinkers
6. The testimony of logic as the ethics of thought to be con-
sidered
7. The account of the concept given by logic
8. The relation of the judgment to the concept .
9. The relation of the syllogism to the concept .
10. Induction and the concept. The induction of Aristotle.
Modern induction. The ideas of energy and law
11. The emphasis in modern logic on the judgment
12. Summary
67
57
5860
61
62
84
65
66
67
70
71
CHAPTER IT
The Origin op Concepts
1. The evolution of the concept to be studied. Order of
investigation 72
2. Concept may be any sense-quality, or idea . 7.3
3. Complex concept 74
X CONTENTS
FAS!
4. Concept of individual 74
6. The concept that is unlike any particular reality; being
a first vague image that has survived; or a composite
image 75
6. The relation of the general concept to individuals: the concept is the essence. Is it numerically repeated?
XJnreflective thinking. The doctrine of the one in the many 77
7. Other changes in the concept 80
8. Substitution of words for other ideas .... 80
9. Conclusion: concepts are sensory in their origin . . 81
10. The "categories" to be studied 81
11. The doctrine that categories are not sense-derivatives.
Its basis. Its incorrectness 82
12. Particular categories to be considered .... 83
13. Space. All contents of consciousness are spatial: illus-
trated by time. Extensity may not be necessary to
all experience, but belongs to human experience. The
qualitative manifold. Quantity derived from quality.
The study of touch, etc., omitted. Concept of space
as indicating its own origin. Its universality. In
what sense it is conceptual. Conclusion reached . 83
14. Time 89
15. Being derived from touch. Why touch is the reality-
sense. The category is a composite image. Its
universality 90
16. Transition to higher categories. Ejection of inner feelings 92
17. Essence. Feeling of the strain of holding by anything . 94
18. Similarity. Not a part of the ideas of objects, but an
idea distinct from them. Probably a visceral feeling 95
19. Substance. The self-feeling or the "somatic conscious-
ness." The unknowable substrate of phenomena . 97
20. Causality. Feelings of effort 101
21. Energy and force the modern substitutes for causality . 103
22. Categories derived from observation of mind and will . 104
23. Teleology due to observation of a special sequence of
phenomena. Immanent teleology .... 104
24. The categories of self, reason, will..... 108
CONTENTS xi
25. The categories are the products of experience. Univer-
sality of categories explained 106
26. Are the categories implicit in all experience? Meaning
of "implicit." How can categories absent from con-
sciousness act upon it? The sensuous content of the
categories 107
27. Kant's view of the origin of the categories considered.
The newness of each part of experience . . . 109
28. Kant's view that principles of synthesis are requisite for
experience. Sense-experience is not made of discrete
units, and the act of the mind is not synthesis . .110
CHAPTER V
The Cognitive Value of Concepts
1. The problem stated 112
2. The composite image is unlike individuals . . .112
3. The concept as an abstraction is unlike individuals . 113
4. The one in the many. The relation not found in spatial
forms, or in conscious experiences. The universal if
not separate from the individuals ceases to be cogni-
tive of any one of them 115
5. Knowledge of the universal is outside the knowledge of
the concrete 118
6. Is the individual to be known as a plexus of universals? 118
7. The universal as synthetic is not cognitive . . . 119
8. Reason and the validity of the doctrine of the one in the
many 119
9. Requisites of knowledge 120
10. Categories to be considered 121
11. Space. Its claim to universality. It does not resemble
the sense-data from which it is derived. Intensity of
psychical states not truly given in quantitative terms.
Is space objective? Yes; in other finite minds. Is
it independent of the mind? It is an idea. If objec-
tive, it is not made known by mathematics . . 121 12. Time 125
xii CONTENTS
PAOB
13. Being. Not the truth of touch-sensations. Its universal application unwarranted: not applicable to other sen-
sations; or to nature 125
14. Essence. Its claim to objectivity examined . . . 127
15. Similarity is a relation that is purely mental . . . 128
16. Substance. Not the truth of the soul. Its application
to matter. Spinoza's use of the category. The scien-
tific use of it 128
17. Causality. Its claims do not find support in conscious
experiences; or in physical phenomena . . . 130
18. Energy. Transformations of energy; the doctrine of
the one in the many; the problem of transformation;
correlation of forces. Conservation of energy: a
quantitative account of what is qualitative. Value of
these principles for science 133
19. The will in modern metaphysics 136
20. Teleology. No special efficiency in the idea of the end.
Immanent teleology not given in any experience. The use of the category in recent philosophy . . . 137
21. Reason 139
22. The self 140
23. Concepts found to be wanting. The faith in them to be
put aside 140
24. Even if a priori in their origin, they are not cognitive . 141
25. Other criticisms of the concept 142
26. Necessities of thought. Laws of thought. Meaning of
necessity 143
27. Utility of concepts 145
CHAPTER VI Empiricism
1. Reason for estimating empiricism 147
2. The doctrine of empiricism. Natural history of mind.
Influence of evolution-theory. Recent psychology . 147
3. Its failure to deal rightly with the problem of episte-
mology. Agnosticism 149
4. Yet empiricism is not necessarily agnostic . . . 151
CONTENTS xiii
PAGE
5. It makes contributions to epistemology in its emphasis
on sensation and the historical method . . . 161
6. The empirical account of universals. Locke. Berkeley.
The denial of universals by Hume and the later em-
piricists. Kecent modifications of empiricism . . 162
7. Even when universals are denied the method of empiri-
cism is that of universals in disguise . . . .166
8. Association of ideas. Fact of association to be distin-
guished from the recognition of association. The
recognition is the scientific ideal of empiricism . 157
9. This recognition means a return to the doctrine of cate-
gories. Coexistence. Succession. Similarity . 159
10. The principles of association are not cognitive . . 160
11. If emphasis be put on the particular ideas that are asso-
ciated together, there is offered, instead of knowledge,
continual reference from one thing to another . . 160
12. Empiricism fails more fatally than transcendentalism
to reach the method of knowledge .... 162
13. Microscopic research 163
14. Utility of association 163
15. Examination of the claim that science seeks laws for the
sake of facts, not facts for the sake of laws . . 163
CHAPTER VII
Knowledge by Sympathetic Imitation
1. Thesis: Knowledge of the not-self is possible through
sympathetic imitation 167
2. Illustrations of imitation in the lower animals and man . 168
3. Imitation is association 170
4. It depends on past experience 171
5. Yet habits are modified by the imagination . . . 171
6. Imitation defined as a mode of perception . . .172
7. The place of the external movement in imitation. The
thought of an action is incipient action. In the child
it often becomes overt action. In observing an action
the child thinks it so as to act it. Hence the extent
of its imitation 173
XIV CONTENTS
PAOI
8. Is imitation an act of will 1 177
9. Reasons for referring to the child's imitations . . 177
10. Results stated 178
11. Imitations in which muscular movement is absent or
imperceptible. They may have various physiological
consequences, but are not images of motor ideas . 178
12. This method of knowledge designated the method of
sympathetic imitation 180
13. Comparison of the knowledge it offers with that offered
by science and philosophy 182
14. Summary 184
15. The relation of imitation to utility to be considered . 184
16. Actions useful and useless: the actions of the organism
are not necessarily utilitarian 185
17. Imitation is not necessarily utilitarian. It is determined
by the object. It has now this objective character,
even if it was originally utilitarian. Spencer's deri-
vation of imitation 187
18. Imitation not due to the desire for pleasure . . . 190
19. Imitation due to growth of perceptive power. It is a
form of play 191
20. The new departure in psychical development . . . 192
21. The cognitive faculty is always imitative. Animism.
Philosophy. The true principles of imitation not
observed 193
CHAPTER VIH
Sympathetic Imitation in Art
1. Imitation cultivated by art 196
2. Widespread interest in art. It flourishes beside science 196
3. Art, in contrast with science, deals with the concrete . 197
4. Its treatment of the concrete: sensuous and sympathetic
art 198
5. Why sensuous art is here considered .... 199
6. Its function is to minister pleasure, but not merely to do
this 199
7. Sensuous art probably the earliest 200
Contents xv
8. Illustrations of sensuous art: colour; sound; muscular
sensations, etc. 200
9. Art, to reach the concrete, must also be sympathetic . 201
10. Transition from sensuous to sympathetic art . . . 202
11. Even the immediate sense-experience may be objectified
by the artist. Meaning of the sympathetic imitation
it seems to involve 202
12. Treatment of inorganic nature by sympathetic art . . 204
13. Architecture. Schopenhauer's theory of burden and
support. The character of the knowledge of this
principle 204
14. How far the painter and sculptor appreciate the beauty
of a living creature by sympathetic imitation. Their
presentation of the inner life is sympathetic . . 206
16. Possible objections to this interpretation of these works
of art. Yet sympathy is unmistakably present in
music and poetry 208
16. Music is in part sensuous; yet sometimes, at least, it
evokes sympathy 208
17. Poetry uses symbols which suggest conscious experiences
associated with them. The lyric expresses the poet's
subjective experience: it evokes sympathy with the
poet. In the epic the poet sympathizes with others.
The novel. Limits of sympathy in epic and novel.
Complete objectivity reached in the drama . . 209
18. Summary of results 214
19. The theory, that art is meant to give pleasure, shown to
be incorrect. Art is objective, and may even give
pain. The theory of Mr. H. R. Marshall . . . 216
20. The idealistic theory. Hegel. The idea cannot be known
to sense. Unity in diversity not the distinctively
aesthetic factor 217
21. Art truer than history, for history adopts the methods of
science. Truer than other sciences .... 218
22. Yet it cannot take the place of science, for it idealizes,
and fails to give knowledge of what is actual . . 219
xvi CONTENTS
CHAPTER IX Sympathetic Imitation in Morality
PAOl
1. Sympathy as the ideal of man's social relations . . 222
2. The Christian view of social duty 222
3. There is a form of love which is the pleasure of the lover.
Its legitimacy. It is not the only love. Benevolence
exists even if love was originally selfish . . . 223
4. But sympathy does not seem indispensable to benevo-
lence. And it is not inculcated by moralists as if it were of supreme moment 224
6. Yet it is part of the Christian ideal 225
6. Its relation to self-regarding love 226
7. The relation of love to knowledge 226
8. Criticism of the Kantian doctrine of knowledge through
morality 227
9. Limitations of morality: it is utilitarian; does not regard
the whole of the universe; does not contemplate the past 228
10. Morality and art compared 229
11. The doctrine that knowledge is a virtue .... 229
12. Result reached 230
13. Sympathy in religion 230
CHAPTER X Synthesis of the Methods
1. Need to combine the methods of science and art . . 232 2. Sense-data or phenomena to be observed . . . 233
5. Coexistences and sequences of sense-data. The true
rendering of the concept 234
4. Space and time not to be taken as metaphysical entities,
but as the empirical forms of experience . . . 236
6. Space and time described as symbols .... 236 6. Other categories have a symbolic value .... 238 7. Reality is that which is matter for knowledge. F. H.
Bradley's definition of the judgment .... 238 8. Substance indicates a certain coexistence . . . 240
CONTENTS xvii
FAS!
9. Causality indicates the order of phenomena . . .241
10. The laws of energy refer to the order of phenomena . 241
11. Essence; similarity; teleology 241
12. Summary of the conclusions in regard to concepts as
symbols 242
13. The meaning of the universality of laws . . . 242
14. Restatement of need for synthesis of science with method
of sympathetic imitation 243
15. Kant's theory of knowledge. Space and time are forms of sense. The function of thought is to unite or syn-
thetize this material 244
16. The value of this account of science .... 246
17. Yet thought is not merely synthesis. Kant's treatment
of the analogies 245
18. Kant's "intuitive understanding." Its function is dis-
charged by sympathy 247
19. The validity of the distinction between phenomena and
things in themselves 249
20. The synthesis of the methods in the light of the develop-
ment of intellect 251
21. The synthesis as applied to the relations of mind and
brain 252
22. Correlation of physical and psychical states. Doctrine
of parallelism 253
23. Meaning of the parallelism: both series of facts are
conscious facts 254
24. The place to be assigned to matter. "Double-aspect"
metaphysical theory 265
25. How is knowledge of the person observed to be gained?It is ideally complete in scientific observation of his
brain and sympathetic imitation of the associated
conscious states 257
26. Is there not a science of these conscious states? Falsity
of psychology 257
27. Apparent inconsistency of discrediting the categories
and at the same time representing them as essential
to knowledge. The categories are used as symbols,
but into the truth gained by sympathy they do not,
r
xviii CONTENTS
as universals, directly enter. Further, they may be
used for the overthrow of their own claim to be the
absolute truth 259
28. Categories are necessary because of human finitude . 261
CHAPTER XI
The Limits of Knowledge 1. Is this method of knowledge practicable? . . . 262
2. Idealistic claim to absolute knowledge. Its rejection . 262
3. Agnosticism. Its general principle .... 263
4. Kant's agnosticism. Its connection with his view of the
function of thought. Its derivation from the idea of
substance. The contradiction involved in it . . 263
6. Spencer's arguments: the absolute exists out of relation;
and cannot be classed 265
6. The agnosticism of positivism 267
7. Dogmatic agnosticism being unjustifiable, the practical
difficulties in the way of knowledge must be considered 268
8. How far the knowledge of a thing is changed by a know-
ledge of the whole of which the thing is a part . . 269
9. The knower cannot in knowledge pass beyond his
conscious states. Yet these may be a copy of the
not-self 271
10. Infinite minuteness needed in the knowledge of any phenomenon. Knowledge of the brain. Memory.
Element of uncertainty in the problem; Weber's
law. The difficulties are practically those which
science has to face in its effort to know a concrete
fact 272
11. Distinction between method and its application. By
aiming at sympathetic imitation we move toward
truth 276
12. Application to the various orders of being. Extent of
sympathy with other men; with animals . . . 276
13. Knowledge of our own bodies 278
CONTENTS xix
PAG1
14. Sympathy with inorganic nature. Doctrine that matter
is sentient. Poetical view 279
15. Possible extension of sympathy in the future . . . 281
CHAPTER XII Self-consciousness
1. The method of sympathetic imitation may apply to a
man's knowledge of his past, but not to present self-
consciousness 282
2. Need to examine the doctrine of self-consciousness which
implies that there is a distinct idea of the self as a
separate entity 282
3. This distinction not found at the beginning of the con-
scious life 283
4. Its development. Its prominence in the life of practical
activity 283
6. It may be absent in intellectual activity .... 284
6. It is a particular idea, and may be excluded by other
ideas. There is a sense in which it is specially
persistent 285
7. It is not necessarily present in its complete form as the
centre to which experience is referred . . . 286
8. Even when it is present, it does not give knowledge of
the self 287
9. The transcendental doctrine of the self as a universal
given in its particular experiences .... 288
10. Self-consciousness not a cognition that imitates the de-
tails of experience 288
11. Self-consciousness explained: conscious states are self-
conscious 289
12. Confirmation of this view by reference to sympathetic
imitation 290
13. Knowledge of the self not in psychological concepts
more than in any conscious state. Kant's "intuitive
understanding" 290
14. How far subjective idealism is justified .... 292
xx CONTENTS
PASS
16. The absoluteness of self-knowledge 292
16. All knowledge is in a sense self-knowledge. How the
self is transcended. Individuality preserved, yet
unity with others. Lotze's view of the relation
between knowledge and its object .... 292
17. The tendency in human life to individuality, and the
tendency to sympathy 296
18. Definition of knowledge recalled 297
CHAPTER XIII
The Philosophical Problem
1. Epistemology is part of philosophy 298
2. It is the foundation of philosophy. Some theory of
knowledge is always adopted by philosophy. Influ-
ence of epistemology illustrated by reference to the
history of philosophy. The present doctrine of
knowledge may bear on the philosophical problem . 298 3. The function which has historically been assigned to philosophy must be studied, and its true function
discovered 300
4. Philosophy ceased early to be merely practical . . 301
6. The claim of philosophy in relation to the special sci-
ences. The science of the sciences .... 301
6. Materialism. Its prevalence 303
7. Materialism and physical science. The achievements
and hopes of science 304
8. The successful explanation of the physical world. Me-
chanical energy 305
9. Materialism and the organic world 305
10. Materialism and human consciousness .... 306
11. Summary of materialistic claims 307
12. Criticism of materialism, as offering a system of concepts;
and as being self-contradictory in its account of knowledge 307
13. Dualism. Partly materialism. Partly an implicit idealism 308
14. Idealism. Its criticism of conception of matter . . 309
CONTENTS xxi
PAGE
16. Undeveloped forms of idealism 310
16. Developed systems of idealism. Hegel. The Absolute is self-consciousness. The process of thought is nec-
essary. Relation of the Absolute to human experi-
ence. The place of science. Philosophy as science
of the sciences 310
17. How far idealism is justified by epistemology . . 313
18. Idealism has sought knowledge in categories . . . 314
19. Claim of Hegel that he presents the concrete . . . 314
20. Empirical origin of the categories recalled. No necessary
connection among them 315
21. The failure of philosophy illustrated by Hegel . . 316
22. True function of philosophy. It is not a system of the
universe 317
23. Philosophy is not an explanation of things . . .317
24. It gives the ideal of thought 318
25. It gives the method of knowledge 319
26. Can truth be exhausted? 320
CHAPTER XIV
Practical Applications
1. The practical questions to be considered . . . 322
2. The effect on scientific work. Science may be merely
utilitarian 322
3. As truth-seeking it is imperfect by itself. Need for a
poetical science 323
4. Lesson for art. Rhyming philosophy not needed. The
place that abstractions may have in poetry . . 324
5. Is a scientific treatise a poem? 325
6. Influences that affect poetry and pervert it 327
7. The dependence of poetry on sympathetic imitation . 328
8. The sensuous function of art. The revelation of the self 328
9. Education. Its aims 330
10. Place of utility 330
11. Utility in its relation to truth. Its ministry to self-
consciousness 331
xxii CONTENTS
PAGE
12. Education in the truth of other things .... 332
13. Science and truth. Emerson's view .... 332
14. The educational curriculum. Classics versus science . 333
16. The "humanities" deal with the subjects most accessi-
ble to human knowledge 335
16. Literature often a pretext for scientific study . . 335
17. Absence of truth-giving literature 336
18. Cultivation of the faculty of sympathetic imitation . 336
19. The moral life. The inspiration of examples . . . 337
20. Is knowledge always desirable? 339
21. Is knowledge of other things an end in itself? . . 339
METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
INTRODUCTION
1. "Who loves not knowledge?" "The desire
to know," says Aristotle, the master of them that
know, "is natural with all men, and an evidence of
this is the love we bear our senses, they being loved
for themselves alone even apart from their practical
use;" and he further finds that man has his per-
fect happiness in the exercise of his rational faculty.
Aristotle in ascribing supreme value to truth is only
expressing the conviction of very many of the sages
of antiquity.
Knowledge is desired not less earnestly in modern
times. The zeal shown in its pursuit is one of the
remarkable characteristics of the present age. It
would be too much to say that the love for science
and philosophy is greater now than in ancient times.
It would be difficult to match the enthusiasm of
Plato or Aristotle. There was, similarly, an ardour
in the love of the early Christians, which in the
present day is seldom, if ever, reproduced. There
b 1
2 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
is generally a glow in the zeal of pioneers which
their successors do not exhibit. Yet the work of
the pioneers, if it prove of value, can still call for
devotion and sacrifice. Christianity is probably
more fruitful now than at any period in its history.
And, likewise, the devotion of modern workers for
knowledge, if less rapturous than that of its first
great apostles, is not less capable of disinterested-
ness. Some may say with Spinoza and Hegel that
knowledge is the highest ideal of life; and many,
who hesitate to go so far in words, show that they
are offering their lives on the altar of science.
2. Not less remarkable is the modern advance of
knowledge. Many questions which baffled the an-
cients have been answered. Many illusions which
dazzled them have passed away. Moreover, many
problems in mental and physical science of which
they did not dream have presented themselves and
have received their solution. The conquests of
science are among the greatest achievements of
modern times.
3. The knowledge thus gained is gradually work-
ing a revolution in the world. The advantages at-
tending the revolution are apparent. By means of
science man is able to control nature and to increase
the comfort of life. The discoveries of physics are
followed by mechanical inventions; the researches
INTRODUCTION 3
of the physiologist and pathologist are made tribu-
tary to the medical art; psychology teaches how
the mind should be trained. In every sphere of
life it is being found that science is giving men
new and better methods of living. Even in the
redemption of those who are evil the procedure is
becoming more scientific. The crimes of men are
not regarded as the expression of an inexplicable
freedom, as if a thunderbolt had fallen from a clear
sky, but are traced back to physical and mental
antecedents; and this knowledge of their relations
is turned to account in the work of reformation and
prevention. Moreover, science is inducing a certain
habit of mind in the contemplation of the universe.
The world is no longer thought of as full of capri-
cious and malevolent powers. Everywhere there is
felt to be order and unchanging law. Light has
come into the world, and superstition and other
creatures of the night have vanished. And many
other benefits might be credited to science. If
these are the works of knowledge, who would not
love her. "Let her mix with men and prosper."
4. This revolution, however, has phases of a more
doubtful kind. The knowledge which is most
eagerly sought is of the kind yielded by the positive
sciences. These sciences profess to offer nothing
but facts and the principles or laws on which these
4 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
facts may be strung. A system of Positive Philos-
ophy is thought to present the sum of knowledge.
There has consequently come into view a certain
want of harmony between science and other im-
portant human interests.
Thus it seems to come into conflict with the moral
consciousness. It represents man as simply part of
the world of phenomena, woven like everything else
into the network of causes and effects, or sequences
and coexistences. It considers him only in these
relations, and finds in him no other value. Further,
science shows its opposition to morality in its
neglect of human emotions. Even when these are
considered by the science of psychology, they are
studied in that dry light which Bacon commended;
they are viewed simply in their casual connection
with other facts. It is charged against the scientific
man that he can "peep and botanize upon his
mother's grave."
There is a similar opposition between science and
art. There is, indeed, a sense in which science
helps art, even as it helps morality. When science
cultivates close attention to the details of objects,
the art which aims at the faithful reproduction of
the appearance which things present to the senses
is promoted. But when art claims to find pleasure
in the colours and sounds of the world, science is
INTRODUCTION 5
indifferent; and if the artist claims, further, that he
feels, as he moves among the objects about him, the
throb of their inner life, his pretensions are met
with scepticism. Even aesthetics has a certain
alienation from the sentiments it investigates.
Again, science wears a look of indifference or
hostility toward religion. The scientific way of
looking at the world is not the religious way.
Science is interested only in facts and their con-
nections; religion regards the world as derived
from and guided by a living Being. It is inter-
esting to observe that Spencer assigns to science,
as its province, the knowable; to religion, the un-
knowable. True, science also ultimately admits
that there is an unknowable, but it is the business
of science to follow out the knowable, as it is
that of religion to recognize the unknowable.
This theory points, at least, to the conviction that
science, in prosecuting its task of investigating
facts, does not find any object of worship. Since
there is this conflict, and since science absorbs
attention in an increasing degree, religion, which
was wont to be the supreme interest, must have
its territory correspondingly reduced. The revolu-
tion is great and is of momentous import. It
should be added that even the science of theology
has often a blighting effect upon piety.
6 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
5. The revolution wrought by science is not
confined to a small academic circle. The diffusion
of science in the present age is wide and rapid.
The democracy is claiming equality in knowledge
as well as in political rights. Many truths which
were formerly the rare treasures of intellectual
aristocrats are now the common possessions of our
school children. In fact, science has become the
great instrument of mental training, and there is
given up to it an increasing portion of the time
devoted to education. Even literature is often
studied according to the methods of science, and
the culture which in such cases it gives is little
different from that given by chemical and physio-
logical researches. It is not to be understood that
those who advocate science as yielding the best
education always mean that it is an end in itself;
they may say that the end is mental discipline, or
even moral culture. The significant fact for the
pupil remains that science has for so long a period
occupied the attention, and that the mind has
learned the scientific way of looking at the world.
6. In view of the claims and influence of science,
it is of the first importance to ask, what it is to
know. The inquiry is not, indeed, of merely
present interest. It is not one belonging to the
exigences of a particular intellectual crisis; it is
INTRODUCTION' 7
of importance whenever there are seekers after
truth. But now the need for it is more pressing
than ever, and it is a question for every one.
We have to ask whether that which is now offered
to the world as knowledge is entitled to be so
regarded, and, if the present methods of know-
ledge are wrong, what is to be substituted for
them.
7. The protest may at once be made that in
the above account of knowledge and the problems
which it raises the achievement of philosophy is
neglected. Knowledge, it will be said, is not to
be identified with science. Science is abstract;
the categories of science are finite; philosophy
finds fault with science as giving at best only
half-truths. Philosophy, on the other hand, has
the full-orbed vision; it claims that it avoids ab-
stractness, and that its categories are infinite. It,
therefore, denies that there are elements in life
which it has failed to recognize, and it asserts that
it has found the method of absolute knowledge.
The claims thus made by philosophy must re-
ceive later careful consideration. At present a
complete estimate of them cannot be given. It
must, however, here be pointed out that science
and philosophy are alike in this respect, — that
both seek knowledge in conceptions or universals.
8 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
8. For it is here that we come on the assump-
tion made by all theories of knowledge alike.
While much labour has been devoted to these
epistemological problems, while Locke and Kant,
Hegel and Spencer, have all grappled with them,
the conclusions reached have all been vitiated by
the assumption made as to the constitution of
knowledge. It has been taken for granted, for
the most part, that the method of science and
philosophy is the right method in so far as uni-
versal or laws are sought. There have been dis-
putes as to the proper procedure in induction, but
not as to the character of the knowledge which
induction yields. That has been regarded as
something fixed, like a fact, or event, which is
something to be investigated, but which is not
to be annulled by any process of investigation.
Even the empiricist, as we shall see, does not dis-
card universals; he only gives another version of
them; like the transcendentalist, he tries to ana-
lyze the content of science, but does not contend
that that content should be different.
9. But this view of knowledge must be sub-
jected to criticism. It must be asked whether this
mode of knowing is the only mode, and whether
it gives knowledge, in the true sense, at all.
When men were discussing the power inherent in
INTRODUCTION g
matter, Berkeley asked the prior question, What
is matter? So it is necessary in discussions re-
garding knowledge that there should be a criti-
cism of the factors thought to constitute knowledge.
10. The questions before us are not primarily
psychological. Knowledge is a thought which is
somehow related to an object, and the aim of the
present work is to consider what that relation is,
or what it may be made. Psychology, on the
other hand, studies the processes of the mind with-
out considering their cognitive value. It asks
whence our thoughts come, and what elements
their analysis yields, but does not inquire into their
fitness to represent other things. The present in-
quiry, therefore, belongs to the epistemological
department of philosophy. At the same time,
psychology is indispensable to the success of such
an inquiry. For, if we would rightly estimate the
value for knowledge of conceptions or other mental
factors, we must determine what the materials are
which have gone to their making, the images, emo-
tions, abstractions, of which they are the resultant
blend. The work at which Kant laboured was a
criticism of conceptions, and Kant's results are
marred because of the imperfections of his psy-
chology: he does not know the history of the
conceptions, and so fails to appreciate rightly their
10 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
function. The cry has often been heard, "Back
to Kant." And it is a summons to be heeded.
But comparatively little result has followed from
the renewed study of the great master, because the
examination of his results has not been carried on
in the light of a true psychology. It is not too
much to believe that, when Kant is studied under
the illumination of this new science, the result of
the return to him will be in a true sense an ad-
vance upon him.
11. The work of Locke and Kant is not yet ac-
complished. The theory of knowledge must benefit
by the more thorough analysis of modern research.
And the result of this investigation is to show
that the method of science and philosophy must
be discarded. Science has been called a "mush-
room growth," and even philosophy is not old.
And though it were much older, the present con-
ception of knowledge has no inalienable right to
the place it occupies. Its sway may be only an
episode in the history of thought. I think that it
can be traced to its origin in a certain definite
philosophical theory, and that the theory can be
proved to be a mistake. It is, therefore, one of
the objects of the present work to show that what
is now offered as science is not truth: that science,
physical, mental, moral, philosophical, is not truth;
~
INTRODUCTION' 11
that no science singly can give it, and that all to-
gether fail. It is then to be shown that for the
attainment of truth a new method must be de-
veloped.
12. It is necessary at the outset to guard against
a misapprehension. It may be said at once that
such a view as that indicated must be fantastical,
and that to bring an indictment against science is
to repeat the folly of ordering the ocean to retire.
It is, however, to be observed that science is not
said to be useless. It is profitable for many things.
It would scarcely have reached the place it occu-
pies had it not served some of the great ends of
living. It is, too, indispensable in the search for
knowledge. It is not, indeed, knowledge. Though
it has usurped the place of knowledge, it is not
the heir to that throne. Yet, though not the heir,
it should be one of the chief ministers of know-
ledge, and its work can be used for knowledge.
Especially is it to be noted that there is no quar-
rel with the spirit of science. The devotees of
science have had truth as their ideal, though they
have not shown discernment in their efforts to
reach it. They are like that ancient religious
people who needed that the God they worshipped
should be declared unto them. The impulse to
know, though approving itself one of the fruits

i2 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
of human evolution most worthy of admiration,
needs to be guided by a criticism that is ever more
careful and comprehensive. And since science has
this ideal and this enthusiasm, he may be its most
faithful friend who seems to be dealing it wounds.
He is not necessarily an enemy of the democracy
who does not look on the republican form of gov-
ernment as the ultimate political constitution. He
may have most of the spirit of science who re-
fuses to regard its methods as above criticism. 13. It is the plan of this investigation to give
first a definition of knowledge. The methods will
then be considered by which men have thought it
possible to attain knowledge of the self on the one
hand, and the not-self on the other. Those who
have not begun to reflect believe that they get
truth in the data of the senses. This view will
be criticised, and at the same time an estimate
will be made of the contribution which sensation
offers to truth. The common view of philosophers
and scientists, that truth is given in general con-
cepts, or universals, or categories, will next be
taken up. The special form of the doctrine given
in empiricism will also be considered. It is a
doctrine that is found wanting in all its forms.
At the same time it will be pointed out that the
concept has its uses in the mental economy. The
INTRODUCTION 13
true method of knowledge will then be expounded.
The method of knowing the not-self will be first
investigated; and it will be shown that this know-
ledge is gained by sympathetic imitation. But
as this method involves the use, to a greater or less
extent, of the other methods, emphasis will be
laid on what is called the "synthesis of the
methods." After this discussion of the conditions
under which knowledge of other things is possible,
it will be a relatively short task to determine
wherein self-knowledge consists. In conclusion,
the bearing of this theory on the philosophical
problem, and also on certain practical questions,
will be indicated.

CHAPTER I
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE
1. In order to determine the function of know-
ledge, it is necessary to take a brief survey of the
great philosophical theories. Such a survey is, in
one sense, disappointing, for the question, What
is knowledge? is one that has received too little
attention from philosophers; even in modern times,
when epistemology has often been the exclusive
topic of philosophy, a definition of the relation
which subject and object sustain in knowledge has
been too little attempted. Yet theories of the
universe have certain views of knowledge as their
presupposition, even when these are not adequately
discussed, and the consideration of such will be the
proper preparation of the way to a definition of
knowledge.
2. The theory was maintained by some of the
early Greek philosophers that like is known by like.
The doctrine may be best appreciated by reference
to the system of Empedocles, who explained the
sense in which he understood it. He taught that
14
DEFINITION Of KNOWLEDGE 15
there are four elements in the universe, — fire, air,
earth, and water. There are besides two forces
which act on these elements,— love and hatred.
While hatred destroys their unity and scatters them,
love or friendship joins them together. By this
process of joining together, the cosmos is produced;
earth and stars and human beings are formed. The
knowledge which the intelligence of man has of
the world of things outside him is rendered possible
by the fact that he is composed of the same ele-
ments as those that are found in things; and each
of the elements in him recognizes the element out-
side him to which it is akin. The air is known by
the air in him; the fire by the fire; the earth by
the earth; and the water by the water.
The theory as thus stated seems crude as a
picture painted by a child. Yet it is to be appre-
ciated properly only if its presuppositions are under-
stood. It was the product of an age when the
world was interpreted in terms of a simple animism.
Fire and air were not dead things; they were living,
like human beings; the principles that joined them
together were not mechanical, they were love and
hatred. These living elements blend in the human
soul, and they reflect the life corresponding to them.
The living, conscious fire and air in man are like
the living, conscious fire and air in other things.
16 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
The doctrine of Empedocles thus loses the crudity
of its first appearance and becomes a suggestion
toward a profoundly spiritual theory.
After all that may be said for the theory, it
must be admitted that it fails to offer a complete
account of knowledge. The material and spiritual
are so mixed that we cannot look for a clear state-
ment of the relations subsisting between conscious
elements and their objective counterpart. More-
over, the self-knowledge of the elements, exhibited
in the case of man, is not yet explained. Yet the
statement that like is known by like formulates a
view of knowledge that is of extreme importance,
and one that was a natural product of the Greek
mind. The unity of spirit and nature has often
been referred to as characteristic of Greek ideas.
The Greek did not think of nature as something
alien from man and lower. It is also true that he
did not think of the gods as inaccessible to man:
they are human. Man is thus one among many
objects of like quality. This attitude toward the
world found its parallel in the assumption regard-
ing knowledge. It was taken for granted that
thought can measure reality, and that there is
nothing to shut out the spirit of man from the
objects about him. Philosophers, therefore, laboured
to define the reality which seemed so certainly
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 17
within their mental reach. Their reflection on this
function of knowledge was expressed in the maxim
of Empedocles.
3. The next important contribution toward the
definition of knowledge is to be found in the ideal-
istic system of Plato. For it is to him rather
than to Socrates that we need here to turn. Soc-
rates, though the author of the philosophic faith
of Plato and Aristotle, has not developed his sys-
tem sufficiently to raise the special problem of
the relation which in cognition subject bears to
object.
Plato teaches that there is a world of ideas ex-
isting independently of the mind. The idea is the
universal, the common concept, or notion. It is
that which abides while individual things change
and pass away. Thus, there is a multiplicity of
beautiful objects, but beauty in itself is other than
they. They are beautiful because they share in it;
they are imperfect because they are only broken
lights of it. It is eternal and perfect. Moreover,
the idea is the real; to it individual things owe
such reality as they have.
Knowledge is the contemplation of these ideas.
The soul sees them. It looked upon them before
it was imprisoned in the body, and even in this
world it can so purify itself as to enjoy the vision
18 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
of them. The bliss of the future life will consist
in the beholding of them.
Thus Plato seems to regard knowledge as some-
thing visual.1 The object is something to which
the eye of the soul is directed. This is the natu-
ral, naive view of knowledge; to look at a thing
and to know it are the same. And so far, the
Platonic contribution to epistemology seems of
little value.
Yet, though Plato so often speaks of knowledge
in terms of sight, he has also given evidence that
he has another conception of the relation between
subject and object. Thus, he says the "true lover
of knowledge will go on until he have attained
the knowledge of the true nature of every essence
by a kindred power in the soul, and by that
power drawing near and mingling and becoming
incorporate with very being, ... he will know
and live and grow truly."2 It is by a "kindred
power in the soul" that the subject knows the
object: Plato finds in knowledge the similarity
of subject and object, if not a closer relation. His
teaching is similar when he declares that the re-
alities of the universe are rational; and also that
the good is the source alike of knowing and being.
1 Cf. Windelband, Geschichte der Philosophie, p. 92.
2 Republic, 490 (Jowett's Translation).
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 19
4. It was the task of Aristotle to modify and
develop the doctrine of Plato. The form of Aris-
totle takes the place of the idea of Plato, yet the
form is not like the idea, something apart from
things; it exists only in things. Further, the
relation of the supreme form to the subordinate
forms is stated. The supreme form is the ground
or "principle" of the other forms; they are also
moved by it: it moves them, for they are moved
by love to it. This highest form is interpreted
according to the purest idealism: God is self-
consciousness, the thought of thought. It must
be remembered, at the same time, that Aristotle
does not elaborate these propositions into the con-
sistent system of idealism which they so strik-
ingly suggest.
Aristotle's doctrine of knowledge is in harmony
with these metaphysical principles. His defini-
tion of truth, as the agreement of thought with
reality, indicates its fundamental principle. In
cognition he distinguishes between that which is
by sense and that which is by reason. By the
former we know the sense-qualities; by the latter,
the rational form. In both cases the knowledge
consists in the presence in the mind of a form
which corresponds to the form in things. "Sense-
perception is that which is receptive of the forms
20 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
of things sensible without their matter, just in the
same way as wax receives the impress of the seal
without the iron or gold of which it is com-
posed." 1 It is to be remembered that sense-
perception relates to the individual, not to the
universal, and, therefore, cannot give us science.
It is the reason that gives this supreme form of
knowledge. Yet in the two kinds of knowledge
there is the same relation between subject and
object. "Thinking is like perception, and con-
sists in being affected by the object of thought
or in something else of this nature. Like sense
then, thought or reason must be not entirely pas-
sive, but receptive of the form — that is, it must
be potentially like this form but not actually
identical with it; it will stand in fact toward
its objects in the same relation as that in which
the faculty of sense stands toward the objects of
perception."2 It seems natural to infer from
such passages that Aristotle's rendering of the
principle that like is known by like, is that the
form in the mind is a copy of the form indepen-
dent of the mind.
Yet there are also passages in Aristotle's writ-
ings in which it is stated that rational thought
1 De Anima, II, 12 (Wallace's Translation).
1 De Anima, III, 4.
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 21
and its object are identical. He may be sup-
posed to mean that the universal, which is one in
the many individuals, is still the same when it
shows itself in the knowing mind. There is,
therefore, here a tendency to pass from the doc-
trine that like is known by like; for likeness
gives place to identity. Aristotle can here be
seen to approach that modern idealism which regards
thought as at once subject and object. Yet he
does not go the length of such idealism.
5. There is yet another knowledge-theory be-
longing to the Greek period of which it is impor-
tant to take account. It is found in the
mysticism of Plotinus. This thinker offered some
serious modifications of the doctrine of Plato and
Aristotle. It seemed to him that the absolute
Being could not be described as though know-
ledge were its essential activity. For in know-
ledge there is a distinction of subject and object,
and the absolute, being one, cannot have this dis-
tinction applied to it. The absolute unity is the
undefinable. Yet, as Plotinus proceeds to show,
it gives rise to reason, which in its turn produces
the ideas of things; and so there is a downward
evolution till matter is finally reached. The
task of the human soul is to reverse this process,
and rise through its degrees till it reaches the
22 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
absolute unity. In this ascent it arrives at the
stage of reason which Plato and Aristotle regarded
as the climax of human attainment. Here it enjoys
the contemplation of the ideas; and this is good;
but it is not the best. The soul passes upward
to gain perfect unity with the Supreme Being.
This condition is reached in ecstasy, in which
the union with God is so complete that self-
consciousness is obliterated, and no awareness of
other existence disturbs the rapturous sense of
possession by God.
It is important to notice in regard to mysticism
that it looks for another kind of unity with the
absolute than that which the rationalists seem to
reach. It may be that the condition of ecstasy
has little claim to stand for the realization of such
ideals, yet the search for some other method of
reaching reality than that of logical categories
demands careful attention. Another peculiarity of
mysticism which concerns us more at present is
that its ideal of knowledge involves the absorption
of the individual in the absolute. It may be
urged, indeed, that mysticism is not a theory of
knowledge, since it is denied by Plotinus that
the highest state can be described in terms of
knowledge. But we must not be misled by words.
If knowledge means the way in which the human
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 23
spirit comes into contact with the absolute reality,
it is not to be decided a priori that the ideal which
it has before it is truly represented in the meaning
usually associated with the term. It is necessary
to keep in mind mysticism as a form of knowledge-
theory.
6. The Greek era passed, and the Middle Ages
came with the dominion of the Christian Church,
and the insistence upon the lesson that man's
supreme task in life is the salvation of his soul.
The lesson was learned; the greatness of the soul
was realized. At the same time, the nature that
environed man was ignored. But this period also
passed. Science revived, and nature was studied
anew. She could no longer be ignored, and each
new discovery of science served to exalt her, and
display her greatness. But the lesson of the
Middle Ages was not forgotten. Man came to
the contemplation of nature with a deepened self-
consciousness. Modern philosophy began, there-
fore, with two seemingly distinct entities before it,
— man and nature; and no small part of its work
has been devoted to the determination of their
relations. The problem presented itself at first
as that of the relation of mind and body. Des-
cartes, the Occasionalists, Spinoza, and Leibnitz
were taken up with questions of this kind. The
24 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
/
discussion touched a deeper level when Locke
asked, what our ideas are, and whether they can
be applied to things.
7. When such questions were asked, it seemed
natural to say that our ideas reveal objects only
as they appear, not as they are in themselves.
There is no longer the original Greek unity of
spirit and nature. Each thing is a substance
which cannot disclose itself save in its effects on
others; and further reflection seems to show that
this is true not only of external things, but of the
Ego: it is known in its appearances. One of the
most characteristic theories of modern times is
agnosticism.
8. Locke gives expression to agnostic views when
he declares that the mind is limited to ideas, and
that all its knowledge consists in the joining or
separating of ideas according to their agreement
or disagreement; but he does not preserve his con-
sistency, for he very soon proceeds to speak of a
knowledge in which our ideas agree with reality.
9. Hume's analysis of the contents of the mind
shows that they are made up of impressions and
ideas. The impressions are distinguished from the
ideas by their greater strength and vividness; thus,
the imagination of a scene, if compared with the
actual contemplation of one, is seen to be pale and
'N
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 25
obscure. It proves on further reflection that all
the ideas are copies of impressions: in a sense
they are all memories. They may be compounded
in various ways and so yield the ideas of imagina-
tion, but the materials are originally derived from
impressions. The great question then arises,
Whence do impressions come, and what know-
ledge do they bring? They arise from "unknown
causes." They may come from objects, or from
God, or from the mind itself. What a doctrine
of knowledge can do is to trace the forms which
these impressions and ideas assume. Hume sets
himself to prove this in tracing the history of the
"philosophical ideas of relation," such as space,
time, causality. He does not find that these ideas
add anything new to our mental content. They
are simply particular ideas considered in a certain
light. The idea of time is not something different
from the succession of ideas. There is a succession
of ideas in us, and, looking at that in such a way that
the aspect of succession is prominent, we have the
idea of time. Time as an abstract idea sundered
from the succession of particular ideas or impres-
sions does not exist. Thus the study of the ideas
of relation confirms the view that there is nothing
in the mind save impressions and copies of impres-
sions. The case of causality has, so far as the
26 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
account of the intellect is concerned, a somewhat
exceptional treatment. Causality is resolved into
constant conjunction in time; but this does not
seem fully to explain the necessity which exists
in the causal bond, and Hume says that this neces-
sity is a new impression which arises when the
constant conjunction is exhibited. Hume thus
admits a special mode of origin for this mental
factor. But he does not assign such an origin to
other relations, nor does he attribute to this origin
any special cognitive value. The necessity in
causality is merely a new impression.
10. Kant offers a theory of knowledge which
agrees, in important respects, with that of Hume.
He also regards impressions as due to unknown
causes. The thing in itself affects the sensibility,
and thus produces the multiplicity of sensations.
But these sensations do not reveal that thing in
itself: they are only modes of the sensibility.
Neither do they reveal the Ego in itself; they
present only its modes. The thing in itself re-
mains absolutely unknown.
Kant differed from Hume in his account of the
"philosophical ideas of relation," or, to use his
own expression, "categories." Quantity, quality,
substance, cause, and the rest, are not merely par-
ticular impressions, or ideas "viewed in a certain
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 27
light." Neither are they new impressions. They
are conceptions, distinct from sense-data, and owing
their origin to the spontaneous activity of the
mind. It might have been expected that Kant
would regard these categories as representing the
thing in itself, for while sensations are merely
states of a conscious subject these mind-originated
concepts might seem entitled to be thought of as
objective. Yet Kant does not so view them. They
are, as far as the thing in itself is concerned, merely
subjective. They bring order and unity into the
chaos of sensation; through them that sense-ma-
terial is woven into the wonderful web which nature
presents. Yet this web remains a mental product.
Nature's laws are the creatures of the understand-
ing. Thus categories fail as completely as sensa-
tions to give us a knowledge of things in them-
selves.
It is true that there are in Kant hints toward
a very different theory of knowledge. He speaks
of the possibility of an intelligence that, unlike
ours, is not "discursive," but intuitive, and so
knows things in their truth. Moreover, while
intellectually we cannot reach absolute reality, we
come into contact with it through our moral facul-
ties, and the great moral principles of the universe
are made known to us. Some of these suggestions
28 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
will be seen to be of great significance. Yet it
remains true that the theory which Kant most
explicitly formulated and most carefully elaborated
is that which is agnostic in its principles.
11. It is not necessary to consider other exposi-
tions of agnosticism, for they contain little that
is new. The doctrine seems, at first sight, to have
assumed a much more developed form in the hands
of Mr. Spencer. Yet what is most distinctive of
his theory is his account of the evolution of ideas.
His agnosticism does not differ from that of Hume:
the manifestations of the unknowable are, he says,
impressions and ideas.
12. It remains to determine the definition of
knowledge which agnosticism sanctions. For in
saying that knowledge is impossible it implies,
obviously, a theory of the nature of knowledge.
And it is also apparent that the view of know-
ledge is like the Greek view. The mental ele-
ments must resemble the elements to be cognized.
Thoughts must be equal to things. The early
Greek view and the modern agnostic view agree
in their presupposition as to the nature of know-
ledge.1
13. There has, however, developed from Kant a
1 Cf. Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, Bk. I, Part II, § 2;
Kant, Kritik der reinen Vernunft (herausg. von Kehrbach), p. 222.
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 29
very remarkable theory of knowledge, which, from
its wide influence at the present time, demands
somewhat careful examination. Kant's agnosticism
has been described. But it is to be observed that,
while he teaches that the categories are merely
principles of unity among sensations, and there-
fore unable to give us knowledge of things in them-
selves, he yet describes the judgments which spring
from categories as knowledge: it is a priori know-
ledge, necessary and universal. This account of
knowledge, as not consisting in relations between
the mind and objects, but as being the develop-
ment of the mind's spontaneous activity, seemed
complete without any reference to an object or
thing in itself. It developed into Absolute Ideal-
ism. Thus, Hegel does not allow that truth refers
to the agreement of cognition with reality, but
contends that it denotes the adequate realization
of the Idea, as we mean by a true man one who
fully realizes manhood. A similar view is repre-
sented by T. H. Green. "Knowledge," he says,
"consists in the consciousness of relations, or re-
lated facts."1 Nor is there an objective world of
which these relations found in consciousness are a
copy. The eternal intelligence communicates to
us "in inseparable correlation, understanding and 1 Prolegomena to Ethics, Bk. I, § 67.
30 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
the facts understood, experience and the experienced
world."1 Many other writers might be cited
who regard the distinction between subject and
object as belonging to a lower stage of the develop-
ment of thought, and who describe knowledge as
an activity of the mind unrelated to anything
beyond itself.
14. This theory is, in part, a reaction against
agnosticism, and in its zeal for the validity of
knowledge, it proclaims that knowledge of an ab-
solute kind is possible because the facts to be
known are all facts of consciousness. It thus
seems to meet all the demands of knowledge.
And it may be that it has a truth to suggest in
regard to the individual human being's knowledge
of his conscious states: we shall consider later
whether each of these may be at once knowing
and being. The validity of the theory might be
conceded also, had we to deal simply with an ab-
solute Reason whose being was his rational activ-
ity. Yet even at this standpoint difficulties present
themselves in the statements of idealists. For
when it is said that the process of the universe is
the knowledge or self-defining of itself by the ab-
solute, it seems clear that there is not merely the
unfolding of the Idea, but that this unfolding is
1 Prolegomena, Bk. I, § 36.
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 31
guided by the purpose of having a subject which
is distinct from, if also identical with, its object.
Apart from this, however, there is a further
problem. It cannot be repeated too often or with
too great emphasis that in the investigation into
knowledge there is first to be considered the know-
ledge of one individual by another. Hegel did not
do justice to the fact of individuality, and trans-
cendentalists generally have been his partners in this
error. But the experiences of individual human
beings are facts; and part, at least, of the problem
of knowledge is the question how one individual
consciousness is to know the experience of another.
My neighbour's actual experience as he reads the
book, or enjoys the sunshine,—how am I to lay
my consciousness alongside of his so that I can in
any true sense know his? It may be said that we
can know him by universals, for knowledge comes
only by such. The assumption is great, but it
need not be here criticised. If my neighbour is
made up of universals, yet they are so knit to-
gether as to make him an individual with a
unique experience, and when I wish to know him
I wish to reproduce that particular plexus of uni-
versals. There are still, therefore, subject and
object which are to meet in the fellowship of
knowledge.
32 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
It may be said that when they attain this fel-
lowship there is unity in the universal. The
reasons for and against this opinion need not be
stated at present. Suppose it to be true, it is to be
observed that this unity is an ideal to be reached.
There is a relation of subject and object, and the
object determines the subject. There is not merely
the spontaneous activity of an evolving Idea.
There is the contrast of two individuals and the
effort of one to become parallel to the other.
One cause of the triumph of the transcenden-
talist view, to so name it, is the success with
which it has seemed to dispose of the material
world. That world seems to be completely ex-
plained when it is resolved into sense-data and
intellectual relations. We do not seem to lose
anything when matter is so regarded. Thus the
act by which matter is created seems to be the act
by which it is known: knowing and being are in
every sense identical. The success of this kind
of argument, however, is due to our complete ig-
norance of matter. Matter is still an inscrutable
mystery. Were our ignorance less complete, we
might find that material things cannot, any more
than human individuals or the lower animals, lose
themselves in, or be resolved into, the mental states
of an intelligence. In any case, the facts which
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 33
must determine a theory of knowledge are those
of which we actually know something; and these
facts are our own experiences, and the experiences
of other human beings. The being of one man
and the knowing of him by his neighbours are, in
certain profound senses, not to be identified. We
are thus brought face to face with a problem such
as that which the Greeks recognized.
15. It is appropriate at this point to take
account of a theory of truth which is sometimes
met with. It is said that the only true know-
ledge that is to be attained by the mind is a
system of consistent judgments. "We must seek
the criterion of truth within and not without the
world of consciousness. It can, then, be nothing
else than the inner harmony and consistency of
all thoughts and experiences."1 Such a view
naturally presents itself when the presuppositions
of Locke and Kant are conceded. If knowledge
consists in the combining or synthetizing of ideas,
the consistency of a system of knowledge may well
be the only possible test of its truth. And at all
times such consistency must be admitted to have
its value as a criterion. But when we are called
lHoffding, Outlines of Psychology, translated by Mary E.
Lowndes, p. 219. Cf. Hume, Treatise on Human Nature, Bk. I,
Part IU, § 6.
34 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
upon to renounce all knowledge save that which
is given in such a consistent system, the vital
interest of knowledge is ignored. To refer to the
crucial test, the man who wishes to know his
neighbour does not aim merely at consistency. The
goal of his effort is not that, but the reality as
it lives before him.
16. We have briefly surveyed the main theories
of knowledge, and they can be seen to fall into
two groups. The view of knowledge of which
Empedocles was taken as the representative is ex-
pressed in the formula, Like is known by like.
This had the adhesion of Aristotle when he said
that truth was the agreement of thought with
reality. It seems also to be the presupposition of
agnosticism. The other view of knowledge is
that which makes it identical with its object:
Aristotle in certain passages identifies the univer-
sal in the mind with that which is manifested in
things; Plotinus seeks for the merging of self-
consciousness in the absolute Being; Hegel regards
knowledge as the unfolding of the Idea. With
this group of theories may perhaps be classed
that which finds the test of truth in consistency.
The truth of the first view is in its recognition of
the distinction between subject and object; but in its
formulation there is not any proper recognition of
L
DEFINITION OF KNOWLEDGE 35
the peculiarity of self-knowledge. The second view
has truth in reference to self-knowledge; it fails to
recognize the problem of the knowledge which one
individual has in the contemplation of another in-
dividual, and thus is fatally incomplete as a theory
of knowledge.
17. This historical survey has prepared the way
for a determination of the nature of knowledge.
Since, in the effort to know, the mind seeks to
think things as they are in themselves, and since
the facts to be known by a human being are the
knowing self and a world of other persons and
things, knowledge may be defined as the presence
in the mind immediately, or in copy, of that which
constitutes objects.
The full exposition and justification of this defi-
nition will be given in the chapters which follow.
It may be pointed out, however, that the definition
is not meant to decide at the outset how the sub-
jective state and the object known are ultimately
related. Whether the subject and object while
retaining their individuality reach in knowledge an
inner identity, or by their individuality are excluded
from such identity, is a question left at present
unanswered. Again, it is not intended to decide
the question as to the knowledge which the self
has of itself in each moment of its existence. It
36 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
remains to be considered whether it must become
an object to itself as other things are objects to
it; or is in some more intimate way knower of
itself in every state of consciousness. What is
affirmed in the definition is that the object, whether
self or not-self, must be present to the knowing
mind in copy or in some more intimate way.
It is further to be remembered that the defi-
nition presents the ideal of knowledge. It is not
less the true ideal because men have failed to
attain it, and in their efforts after it have used many
false methods, and taken many an illusion for the
prize of their search.
It is here left undetermined how far this ideal
is possible of attainment. It may be that the ag-
nostic conclusion is in important respects the correct
one. Even the argument of Berkeley, that God
has not given His children a strong desire for any-
thing that He has forever put beyond their reach,
is one that must be used with caution. It will
have to be decided how far it is possible to reach
the absolute reality. But the ideal is the ideal of
knowledge. It will justify itself as such as we
proceed, and it will be the true test of the methods
of knowledge.
CHAPTER II
SENSATION, FEELING, AND VOLITION AS COGNITIVE
FACTOES x
1. If the question were asked, How do we get
our knowledge of objects? it is likely that most
people would answer without hesitation that we
get it through the senses. The panorama of nature
is spread before the eye; her music comes to the
soul through the ear. All that we know of her
seems known by the senses: they are the "gateways
of knowledge." Moreover, things are believed to
exist in themselves just as the senses report them.
The colours of earth, and cloud, and human face
are thought to be just the same when no eye beholds
them; the symphony of nature is the same whether
or not there are living creatures to listen to it.
Sensation is thus taken to be the great method of
knowledge. "It seems evident," says Hume, "that
men are carried by a natural instinct or preposses-
sion to repose faith in their senses."
1 While feeling and volition are not usually recognized as instru-
ments of knowledge, the present discussion of sensation seems to
afford a proper opportunity for attempting an estimate of their
cognitive value.
37
38 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
2. "But," Hume adds, "this universal and pri-
mary opinion is soon destroyed by the slightest
philosophy." And, in truth, from the beginning
of philosophy, sensation has for various reasons
been disparaged as a method of knowledge. Even
empiricists, who seem to restrict themselves to
sensation, do not regard it as yielding knowledge
in the strict sense of the word; generally they are
agnostics. It is only among those unaccustomed
to reflection that sensation is taken for the method
of knowledge.
3. The reason for rejecting sensation is not that
the senses are often the victims of illusions. The
objections are to the deliverances of the senses when
all so-called illusions have been corrected.
Thus there is the contention of the transcenden-
talists that the cognitive or objective element in the
mind is other than sensation. To externalize such
sense-qualities as sound and colour and to make
them objects is to go beyond the warrant of mere
sensation. A sensation is a purely subjective
somewhat. A colour by itself is not the thought
of an object. To make it an object there are
called into operation the categories of space and
substance. At the best, sensation serves as an
occasion for the exercise of reason. Just as the
word tree is not the representation of the actual
SENSATION, FEELING, AND VOLITION 39
tree, but may suffice to call into exercise the facul-
ties which are necessary to the distinct figuring of
the tree, so the sensation serves to call into exercise
the rational faculty, and elicit not images but con-
cepts or categories, in which alone knowledge is to
be found.
Nor is it the transcendentalist alone who finds
sensation wanting. The researches of the physicist
seem to establish similar conclusions. The physi-
cist finds that the objective system of things is a
system of forms of energy, possibly associated with
a material substrate. This system bears no simi-
larity to the series of sensations by which its
existence is indicated to us. Vibrations in the ether which are the objective counterpart of colours
are yet in no way like colours; and vibrations in
the air are not like sounds. The objective world
is not coloured; nor is it a vocal world. There is
thus a breach between the intimations of the senses
and the objective world revealed by science.
A very similar objection presents itself to the
view of physiological psychology. When there
is studied not merely the movement in the world
external to the body, but the process in the
nervous system, the contrast of the physical and
psychical processes is not less striking. The
physiologist finds certain activities of a physical
40 METHODS OF KNOWLEDGE
and chemical kind carried on in the cells and
fibres which constitute the nervous system. In
an ordinary sense-experience some agent in the
physical world starts the activities of the so-called
end-organs; the action is propagated to the brain;
and a sensation results. But the sensation is not
a knowledge of the brain-activity. The two bear
no resemblance to each other. The student of
the brain confesses that, however intimately he may
come to know the brain, he does not expect to
diminish the disparateness between the appear-
ance which it presents and the sensations which
are due to its activities. Thus the objects to which
sensations might be referred, whether they are the
immediately antecedent physical processes in the
brain, or the more remote objects to which
the nervous activities are ultimately to be traced,
show themselves to be of another quality of being
than these sensations. It seems just, therefore,
to conclude that as reflection progresses the cogni-
tive value of sensation diminishes in credit.
4. These criticisms of sensation will be consid-
ered more or less directly as we proceed; and it
will be seen that while they have certain obvious
facts to rest on, the conclusions are of little value.
They have been referred to here to account for
the common disparagement of sensation. There is,
SENSATION, FEELING, AND VOLITION 41
however, a characteristic of sensation which is so
far a justification of these criticisms, or, at least,
specifies the sense in which sensation is not cogni-
tive. Sensation is subjective; it is a state of the
subject; there is no reason for thinking that it is
a state of the object at the time when, and in the
form in which, this object acts as stimulus. When
a man looks on his neighbour's face, he has certain
sensations of colour. He does not thereby know
his neighbour, for there need be nothing in his
neighbour's physical or mental constitution of which
that sensation is the likeness. The colour is his
feeling, not his neighbour's. It is, therefore, right
to reject the naive uncritical view that things exist
just as our senses report them.1 The view is as
false as the view would be that a word resembles
the object for which it stands.
5. But there is a sense in which the sensibility is a
truly cognitive faculty. There is a sphere in which
it alone can give knowledge, — the sphere of sensa-
tion itself. Since like is known by like, sensation can be known only by sensation.
1 Yet there is a tendency on the part of some writers to return
to this uncritical view. Mach, e.g., says, "The world with my
Ego appeared to me as one coherent mass of sensations." (Con-
tributions to the Analysis of the Sensations, translated by
C. M. Williams, p. 23, note.)
