* 343308162642 0


«L*z=rr-—--—••-

.
:
o
The Aesthetic Experience: Its Nature
and Function in Epistemology
By
WILLIAM DAVIS FURRY
A Dissertation Submitted *o the Board of
University Studies of th^ Johns Hopkins
University in Conformity with the
Requirements for the Degree
of Doctor of Philosophy
THE REVIEW PUBLISHING CO
BALTIMORE
1908
89
PRESS OF
* WII.KINS_COHPANT
BALTIUOBE
CONTENTS.
INTRODUCTION , v-xv
PART I.
CHAPTER I. The First Immediacy 1-27
I. Description of Original Experience I
II. Simplicity of Only Relative 4
III. Its Value in Present Discussion 8
IV. Characteristic Products of 9
V. Rise of Dualistic Experience 10
CHAPTER II. The Second Immediacy or Semblant Consciousness 11-23
I. The Inner-Outer Dualism 11
II. Memory vs. Fancy 12
III. Characteristics of the Semblant Object 13
IV. Place of the Semblant in the Development of Thought 21
CHAPTER III. Dualistic Character of Reflective Experience 24-37
I. Content of Thought Dualistic 27
II. Control of Thought Dualistic 28
III. Types of Meaning not Rendered in Reflection 31
IV. Mystical Outcome of Modern Attempts to Transcend the
Dualism of Thought 33
CHAPTER IV. The Aesthetic as a Hyper-Logical Experience 38-64
I. Nature of Current Epistemological Problem 38
II. The Nature and Outcome of the Intellectualistic and the
Voluntaristic Programme 40
III. Characteristics of the Higher Semblant or Aesthetic Experi-
ence Found to be Those Demanded by the Epistemological
Problem of Reflective Thought 47
IV. Conclusion 61
PART II.
CHAPTER V. Greek Thought to Thales as Illustrative of the First 1 mme-
diacy._ 65-73
I. Characteristics of Primitive Thought 66
II. The Unreflective Myths 68
III. The Rise of Dualistic Experience 70
iv CONTENTS.
CHAPTER VI. Greek Thought from Thales to Neo-Platonism 74-9°
I. Rise of Inner-Outer Dualism 74
II. Democritus 76
III. Socrates and the Sophists 77
IV. Plato, Poet ratherthanScientist 78
V. Aristotle and his Treatment of Art 80
VI. Mystical Character of Post-Aristotelian Thought 84
VII. Neo-Platonism 88
CHAPTER VII. Plotinus to German Mystics of Sixteenth Century 91-105
I. Growth of Scholasticism and Mysticism 93
II. Augustine and his Emphasis upon the Will 96
III. Individual Thrown Back upon Himself 98
IV. The Renascence 100
V. The Reformation IOI
VI. The Mystics, Bohme and Others 104
CHAPTER VIII. Descartes to Kant and German Mystics 106-129
I. Dualism of Descartes and the Occasionalists 106
II. Spinoza and Pantheism I Io
III. English Empiricism 112
IV. Leibniz 115
V. The Faith Philosophers, Lessing, Jacobi and Herder 117
VI. Kant and the Third Critique 119
VII. The Mystics, Maimon, Reinhold, Schiller,etc 124
CHAPTER IX. From Kant to the Present I3O-155
I. Post-Kantian Idealism 130
II. Fichte 131
III. Schelling 133
IV. Hegel and his Use of Art 136
V. Schopenhauer and Art 144
VI. Modern Attempts to Solve the Epistemological Problem
Presented by Reflective Experience 147
VII. The Present Status of the Epistemological Problem and
the Use of the Aesthetic Experience as a Solution 149
'
INTRODUCTION1
That the epistemological problem is the most urgent in cur-
rent philosophical discussion is to be inferred from the intro-
duction into the more complete works of Logic and Metaphysics
of topics that directly pertain to neither. The preliminary
discussions found in such works as Bradley's, Bosanquet's, and
Sigwart's Logic are not however psychological precisely, neither
are they to be regarded as an indication that Psychology is be-
coming sufficiently ample in its programme to include what pre-
viously was regarded as subject-matter of more or less independ-
ent philosophical disciplines. The introductory chapters in
the works thus named are rather epistemological than psycho-
logical. Paulsen is historically justified in holding that Epistem-
ology arises always as a critical reflection on Metaphysics with
which it is, at the first, identified. From Kant and Locke until
now the conviction has been growing that knowing precedes
being, so that the priority which Metaphysics so long held
should be given to Epistemology. The limitations as well as
the possibilities of human knowledge are to be sought within the
knowing process rather than in some already determined
objective existence.
Since the time of Locke and Kant, epistemological inquiry
has been increasingly to the fore. There was 'constant whetting
of the knife' until the time of Lotze, who felt that the whetting
process should end and an actual theory of the object of knowl-
ledge established. But despite the constant whetting of the
knife the conviction will not down that the whetting has not
yet been sufficiently done.
Both Kant and Locke were embarrassed by metaphysical
presuppositions in assuming an existence falling beyond the
1 This Introduction, while intended to define the epistemological problem,
serves also in a measure as a summary of the writer's position. The de-
tailed references to the authorities mentioned will be found in the later more
extended passages of the essay.
vi THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
limits of thought. The objective, as determined apart from
the knowing process, held the determining role in thought, and
continued so to do until the idealistic reaction of the Post-
Kantians. The attempt was then made to establish the
object of knowledge wholly in terms of the subject. Self-con-
sciousness was held to be the sole condition of knowledge.
Experience was regarded as the realization of a single, spiritual
principle, while the successive modes in the development of
knowledge were regarded as the specific ways in which this
one principle embodies itself. The unity of experience, which
had hitherto been sought beyond experience, was disclosed in
the evolution of the self. The object of knowledge becomes
thus intimately related to the subject that has it as object.
With Hegel the self came to be identified with reflective
thought. Reality came also to be identified with thought,
since being which should fall beyond the process of thought
would be the same as the non-existent. The distinction of
subject and object as the necessary condition of knowledge
at any stage of the development of thought, is a distinction
of mind from itself and finds its completion when mind
becomes conscious that the distinction is of its own mak-
ing. Nevertheless, the object of knowledge to be vital and
fruitful, must be more than is already given in thought. The
self is not furthered by merely revolving its own perfections.
If the object is not more than the subject, thought as judg-
ment, becomes both meaningless and useless. This position
is also expressed in the view of Lotze that 'reality is richer than
thought', and in the statement of Bradley that 'knowledge is
unequal to reality.' All these expressions are based upon the conviction that thought must somehow refer to a real beyond
itself. Thought, therefore, remains dualistic despite the at-
tempted identification of its two aspects in terms of rational
thought.
Kant also found that thought as such is dualistic and so
concluded that "beyond the bounds of knowledge there is a
sphere of faith." But what thought could not do, Kant thought
the moral consciousness able to accomplish. The Voluntarists,
including the Pragmatists of the present time, seek in turn to
INTRODUCTION. vii
make the will the explaining principle of the mind and the sole
organ of reality. But Kant found that the moralistic position
is also dualistic since the will cannot reduce the subject-matter
of thought. Every genuine act of will involves a struggle upon
the part of the subject toward its object, which is not, as yet,
an actual possession. The object of the will, as also the object
of thought, must represent an 'other' as a larger and more com-
plete experience, in which the dualistic character of will is to be
transcended by being absorbed in a more complete experience.
The dualisms of both the theoretical and the practical, be-
queathed to modern philosophy by Kant, constitute under one
form of statement or another, the epistemological problem
of current discussion. Defined as the dualism of mind and
body, it is sufficient to indicate that it cannot be solved by re-
ducing either term of the dualism to the other. This means
necessarily the loss of the meaning attaching to the one, without
a corresponding increase of meaning attaching to the other.
Both terms of the dualism have come to represent definite
types of meaning and any attempt at a solution of the problem
thus set by ignoring either type of meaning is already doomed.
The inability of any one of the more modern attempts to solve
the epistemological problem is to be found in the fact that
these several attempts have either minimized or wholly ignored
one or the other of these types of meaning. That mind cannot
be reduced to body is evidenced by the fact that Materialism
represents a passing philosophy. The rapid spread of idealistic
philosophy in our day shows also how easily the metaphysical
doctrine of the unreality of things visible and tangible can be
popularized. Paulsen is abundantly justified in his character-
ization of modern philosophy as tending toward idealism.
The inability, however, of either of these two general types of
philosophy to satisfy the mind indicates that the solution of
the epistemological problem has not only not been adequately
achieved, but that such solution can be attained only by
reaching a farther meaning in which both types of meaning
are merged in a single unitary mode of experience.
The dualistic character of the epistemological conscious-
ness is generally recognized in current discussion. The dual-
viii THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
ism is, however, no longer regarded as a datum of immediate
experience, but rather an experience into which consciousness
develops. The epistemological consciousness [must therefore
be treated genetically and while affirming the position of St.
George Mivart that "Epistemology is a product of mental ma-
turity both racial and individual," likewise the position of Or-
mond that "the distinction of subject and object is fundamental
to Epistemology" and still further the position of Professor
Baldwin that, "it is only when the mode of reflection has been
reached, in which the subject takes the objective point of view,
that the knower becomes an Epistemologist," we shall main-
tain in the present discussion that the epistemological con-
sciousness of reflection, with its characteristic problem of uni-
fication and completion, has been reached only when conscious-
ness has passed through a series of earlier dualistic experi-
ences, in each of which the epistemological problem presented
itself. No one mode of the development of thought is to be
taken exclusively as containing the explanation of the whole,
but all forms of knowledge are to be considered. Taking this
point of view, it at once occurs to us that it is necessary to widen
the generally accepted notion of the nature of the epistemolog-
ical consciousness and the problem which it presents.
Upon analysis, thought is found to involve always the pres-
ence and operation of two moments, which in reflective thought
are recognized as 'content' and 'control.' The programme of
a Genetic Epistemology would be the tracing of the develop-
ment of thought both in the individual and in the race with
respect to the increasingAleterminateness of these two aspects.
Hegel's Phanomologitaes Geistes, represents an attempt in this
direction but lacks the psychological point of view requisite to
the genetic method. Baldwin's Thought and Things is the
most complete and satisfactory attempt yet made to treat
knowledge genetically.
In the light of such a method of treatment of the develop-
ment of thought it is seen that thought has reached the dualism
of reflective experience only by passing through a series of
earlier dualistic experiences, at each of which a higher mode of
conscious determination was made possible by the establish-
INTRODUCTION.
ing of a more comprehensive and complete experience. Each
successive mode of mental determination is made possible and
necessary by the presence in consciousness of partial and frag-
mentary meanings. Thought, as Bradley discerns, is always
incomplete and must, for the sake of its own completion, be
absorbed in a fuller experience. The Voluntarists also find
the ideas, as internal meaning, finite and fragmentary, and
this necessitates an external meaning as an 'other' and more
complete and all-inclusive experience. Both the Intellectual-
ists and the Voluntarists agree that thought and will seek an
object in which both alike are to be completed. But such
completion is necessarily a further experience. To attempt to
solve the epistemological problem presented at any stage of its
genetic development by a return to genetically earlier experience
means a mutilation of the system of meanings already acquired,
while the resulting constructions become more or less empty
postulates.
Despite the increased discussion of the epistemological
problem in modern philosophical inquiry, one seeks in vain
for a definite statement of the problem itself. According to
Bradley it is the problem of "forming the general idea of an
absolute experience in which all phenomenal distinctions are
merged—a unity which transcends and yet contains every
manifold appearance in an immediate, self-dependent and all-
inclusive individual." For Bosanquet, it is the "work of
intellectually constituting a totality which we call the real
world." With Royce, who proceeds from the more active
aspect of consciousness, and makes will rather than thought
the explaining principle of the mind and the organ of reality,
the epistemological problem presented by the subject-object
dualism of reflective experience is the "transcending of the
subjective by the process of completely embodying, in indi-
vidual form and in final fulfilment, the internal meaningof finite
ideas." The Pragmatists finally, by subordinating the theo-
retical to the practical, thus identifying the true and the good,
attempt to solve the problem by reinstating a form of experi-
ence in which stimulus and response, as the two aspects of
the life of action, regain their old-time immediacy. Group- *•
X THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
ing the Pragmatists with the Voluntarists, it is to be said that
they, together with the Intellectualists, represent the two cur-
rent types of epistemological theory, while both alike reach the
conclusion that the epistemological problem is the setting up of
a larger and more complete experience in which the limitations
alike of thought and will are overcome.
Defining the progress of cognition again as an increasing
determinateness of the two aspects, content and control, the
limitation of each of the two preceding types of epistemological
theory becomes evident. Each proceeds by attempting to
make the one or the other of the two aspects of thought an
impenum in imperio, and both reach the common conclusion
that either of these two aspects cannot interpret the whole of
experience. Assuming that reflective thought involves the
subject-object dualism, the Intellectualists attempt to reconcile
the dualism thus presented by an exclusive emphasis upon the
side of the object as a related content. The control aspect,
according to Bradley is "something necessary, but still per
accidens. And as thought can not make phenomena, it con-
tents itself without them and is therefore symbolic and not
existential." Whatever form and structure the content, of
knowledge may come to show are dependent upon the laws of
thought. The control aspect, however, retains its primitive
value and validity,while the presented contents, as the result of
a process of increasing contextuation, become but sublimated
symbols of the reality which they once constituted. The dual-
ism of the intellectualists represents the presence and conflict of
two sorts of experience, one immediate, characterized by lack
of reference beyond mere psychic existence, and the other medi-
ate, characterized by the relational and discursive character of
thought. The epistemological problem is occasioned by the
conflict of these two types of experience, a conflict arising only
when reflection is reached, and finds its solution, for the time
being, by a process of making thought merely psychic, thus
identifying the mediate with the primitive immediacy. Bradley
is at pains to indicate, however, that the conflict between
these two types of experience is due to the presence of reflective
thought, rather than the reverse, as the Voluntarists and Prag-
matists are today insisting.
INTRODUCTION. xi
The latter, as representing a second type of epistemological
theory, seek to overcome the dualistic character of reflective
experience by placing almost exclusive emphasis upon the
control aspect of thought, inwardly or subjectively interpreted.
The object of thought, they hold, must represent the expression
and embodiment of the subject as the inner organizing, deter-
mining principle of knowledge. The object of knowledge is
what it is only because the subject means it as its own object.
Ideas as content of thought are acts of will as well as acts of
cognition, and the object of thought is but the embodiment and
fulfilment of an exclusive act of will or purpose. The subject
of knowledge can acknowledge no object other than those of
its own determination. What therefore the content of thought
is, as well as the relational character which characterizes it,
is determined solely in terms of the will as the controlling
and organizing moment of experience.
But it is found that both types of epistemological theory are
inadequate, in that each finds meanings which it is not able to
reduce in terms of its explaining principle. The Intellectual-
ists find with Bradley that thought can never harmonize its own
content, meaning that thought as such can never transcend the
dualism of the 'that' and the 'what' as the two aspects of
thought. The more complete thought becomes as a relational
system the deeper and broader becomes the dualism. To
attain reality as the object of thought, meaning an experience in
which these two aspects of thought are reconciled, means neces-
sarily breaking with thought, so that the conclusion is reached
in the present discussion that reality, as a unified experience,
becomes for the Intellectualists an a-logical and mystical postu-
late.
The Voluntarists likewise find that will, as the controlling
and organizing aspect of thought, is also dualistic, since it is
unable to reduce the subject-matter of reflective thought. To
reduce the true to the good, as for instance Professor James
does in his recent lectures on Pragmatism, only shifts the em-
phasis of the dualism. The dualism remains as one of end or
good and fact, together with the epistemological problem of its
reconciliation. Will can not harmonize its content with the
xii THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
data of thought, and the attempt to solve the epistemological
problem thus presented by making the will all-sufficient by
reaching a 'volitional immediacy' in which the will wills only
its own will, is to set up an a-volitional postulate which is also
mystical.
The final outcome of these two types of epistemological
theory is closely identical, in that both alike reach an absolute
experience which, as the completion alike of the finite and frag-
mentary character of thought and will, 'is not anything but
sentient experience.' Such is the necessary outcome of any
epistemological theory which proceeds by ignoring either of
the two aspects of thought. The strength of each type of
theory however represents the weakness of the other. The
farther the Voluntarist pushes his programme, the more he
reveals the need of thought as lending value and meaning to
the life of will. Whatever meaning is found attaching to the
practical life is borrowed from reflective and rational experi-
ence. The fact is that, if the will were able to will itself, to
operate as it were in a void, occasion for an act of will would
never arise. Professor Royce is quite right in holding that the
active life is motived by the finite and fragmentary character of
finite ideas. But a farther experience, in which present expe-
rience as limited and incomplete is made more complete, can
not be reached by reverting to an earlier more immediate mode;
the absolute experience must represent fulfilment, not destruc-
tion. And likewise, the farther the Intellectualist extends his
programme, the more is felt the need of bringing thought into
more fruitful relations with the more active and selective
aspects of experience. Thought as such is pale and as it were
removed from the concrete character of life as actually lived.
It only "formulates and duplicates, divides and recombines
that fullness of reality which is had directly and at first hand
in sense experience." Bradley recognizes the static character
of reflective thought, but is unable to avoid this outcome. The
Voluntarists, with Professor Royce, also appreciate that the
dualistic character of reflective experience can be transcended
only in a fuller and richer embodiment of whatever meanings
consciousness already has. Neither type of theory can limit
INTRODUCTION. xiii
(
itself to its own programme because each proceeds by abstract-
ing one of the two essential aspects of knowledge.
These criticisms suggest that, if knowledge is to escape from
the cul-de-sac in which reflective experience involves it, it can
do so only in some mode of experience in which the two aspects
of thought, content and control, with whatever meanings attach
to them, are brought together in some larger whole. The
determination of such a mode of experience represents the epis-
temological problem par excellence. Such experience will be in
type neither purely rational and static nor wholly volitional and
dynamic; it must be a mode in which, as Professor Baldwin
says, "experience can find its dynamics intelligible and can act
upon its static meanings as immediate and dynamic satisfac-
tions."
The burden of the present discussion is that the aesthetic
experience represents a mode of conscious determination in
which the two aspects of thought are recognized and reconciled
by the rise of a new mode of immediate experience.
The essential character of this type of experience is the 'sem-
blant' treatment of meanings already present for the sake of
further meaning as fulfilling personal purposes. By this method
of treating meanings already present as having a further mean-
ing, using present meanings as schemata for more complete
meanings, consciousness completes the otherwise incomplete
and fragmentary character of its present store. The epis-
temological problem of the Intellectualists is precisely the
problem of setting up of an 'other' as a richer experience in
which thought as incomplete might complete itself. On the
other hand the epistemological problem of the Voluntarists is
that of discounting a future experience which, as external mean-
ing, completely embodies the otherwise finite and fragmentary
character of finite ideas. Both alike hold that the experience in
which thought and will are completed is a state of immediacy in
which both theoretical and practical interests are wholly satis-
fied. But each type of theory, failing to recognize the mediatory
role of the semblant treatment of an already guaranteed content,
has to fall back on a mode of reality beyond its own monistic
postulate, thus hugging to itself a mass of ill-gotten gain.
xiv THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
In the present discussion it is shown that the aesthetic arises
with the epistemological alike in the race and in the individual;
that the aesthetic experience has passed through a series of stages
of development at each of which it reflects the epistemological
problem then present and crying for solution. Upon analysis,
the aesthetic experience at each of these several stages is found to
possess precisely those characteristics which enable it to reduce
the several meanings which neither thought nor will can of itself
reduce. As Kant long ago perceived, neither the theoretical nor
the practical reason can heal the wound that reflection makes.
The need is for a type of interest sui generis; and this is what we
find the aesthetic interest to be. It represents a treatment of
meanings already acquired for the sake of the further meaning
thatinspires them, the process of reaching a completerexperience
—an ideal whole—through the schematic treatment of earlier
partial experiences of thought and will. The object thus con-
structed is held up and treated as being what it is not and as be-
ing everything save precisely whac in its concrete isolation it is.
It sets up the 'other' of thought as a further meaning which while
not realized, can nevertheless be treated 'as if it were.' The
object of thought thus constructed does not break with experi-
ence, since it represents a more complete experience. There is
a focusing of the two aspects of thought by a process of detach-
ment from the original spheres in which they hold as mediate
experiences, by the setting up of a larger whole of experi-
ence in which both aspects become moments in what is imme-
diate.
The aesthetic experience thus represents the expression of an
interest which is neither theoretical nor practical. Because of
this, it is fitted to reconcile and unify these two types of interest.
It is true, as Professor Tufts contends, that the aesthetic did not
arise to satisfy an already existing sense of the beautiful; but to
identify it with either of the two recognized types of interest
means to reduce the aesthetic to the limitations from which it
seeks to disengage them. The point to be insisted upon in the
present discussion is the fact that the aesthetic can not be reduced
to any form of mediate experience, without at once bringing about its own destruction; this qualifies it as a mode of experi-
INTRODUCTION. XV
ence in which these several mediate types are reconciled and
the entire psychic function furthered.
Defining genetic epistemology as the tracing out of the de-
velopment of thought with reference to the increasing deter-
minateness of its two aspects of content and control, and defin-
ing the epistemological problem as that of the furthering of these
two aspects without the sacrifice of either, by the establishing
of a more complete experience in a new and higher immediacy
which in turn becomes the platform for still higher reaches of
thought; and further defining the aesthetic experience as a mode
of conscious determination in which the guaranteed meanings of
consciousness are mediated with reference to a further and
ideal experience—an experience whose value lies, as Professor
Baldwin says "in discounting in advance any new demands for
mediation which new dualism may make," the epistemological
function of the aesthetic at once becomes evident. The 'abso-
lute' experience is thus reached. It is not a formal and static
experience, such as the Intellectualists reach, nor is it a blind and
meaningless dynamic as the Voluntarists teach; but it is rather
an experience which is richer and completer than either thought
or will or both together, since it represents an experience in
which the 'genetic dynamogenies as well as the static dualisms
are mediated.1
1 Baldwin, Psychological Bulletin, Vol. IV, No. 4, April, 1907; see also Thought
and Things, Vol. II, Appendix, II. My indebtness to Professor Baldwin, both
with respect to general ideas and to details, will be evident to the reader. I
wish especially to acknowledge the use of material from his unpublished lectures
on the nature and role of the aesthetic.
THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE: ITS NATURE AND
FUNCTION IN EPISTEMOLOGY. PART I. EXPOSITORY.
CHAPTER I.
The First Immediacy as Illustrating an A-dualistic Conscious-
ness and as being Pre-epistemological and Pre-aesthetic.
Mr. A. E. Taylor has pointed out that the character of
experience for the metaphysician is its immediacy, meaning
that character of experience in which existence and content
considered as the two aspects of reflective thought are not sepa-
rated in consciousness. Such immediacy, he proceeds to say,
may be due to the absence of reflective analysis of the given con-
tent into its constituent aspects, or it may be due to fusion, at a
higher level, into a single directly apprehended whole, of the
results won by the processes of abstraction and analysis. There
is, he concludes, an immediacy which is below reflective thought,
as well as an immediacy which is above it. It is with what Mr.
Taylor calls the immediacy below reflection that we have to do
in the present chapter.1
That consciousness, alike in the individual and the race, is,
in its first appearance, immediate in the sense of being a-dual-
istic, is a conclusion by no means peculiar to Mr. Taylor.
Psychologists and anthropologists alike hold, that conscious-
ness, in its first appearance, is undifferentiated and protoplasmic,
the 'big, booming confusion' of James, the 'undifferentiated
continuum' of Ward, and the 'relatively pure objectivity' of
Baldwin. These several writers agree in holding that primitive
consciousness is a-dualistic in the sense, that there is present in
consciousness no distinction between given data and the result-
ing constructed meanings. "The child" as James says, "does
not see light, but is light." To open the eyes is precisely
seeing. There is no reference of presentations to the external
1 A. E. Taylor, Metaphysics, p. 32.
2 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
world since at this stage of conscious development there is no
distinction made between content and other things. "There
was a time" says Bradley, "when the separation of the outer
world as a thing apart from our feelings had not even begun."1
And again he says, "in the beginning there is nothing beyond
what is presented; what is, is felt, or is rather felt simply. There
is no memory or imagination or fear or thought or will and no
perception of likeness or difference. There are in short no
relations and no feelings but only feeling. In all one blue with
differences which work and are felt, but are not discriminated."2
A more recent description of this first immediacy is given by
Professor James under the caption 'Pure Experience.' "Pure
experience" he says, "is the name which I give to the original
flux of life before reflection has categorized it. Only new-
born babes and persons in semicoma from sleep, drugs, ill-
nesses or blows can have an experience pure in the literal
sense of a that which is not yet any definite what, though
ready to be all sorts of whats. . . . Pure experience in
this state is but another name for feeling or sensation. But the
flux of it no sooner comes than it tends to fill itself with emphases
and these to become identified and fixed and abstracted; so that
experience now flows as if shot through with adjectives and
nouns and prepositions and conjunctions. Its purity is only a
relative term meaning the proportional amount of sensation
which it still embodies. ... In all this the continuities
and discontinuities are absolutely co-ordinate matters of immedi-
ate feeling."3
It is assumed, therefore, that within this first immediacy the
distinctions characteristic of reflective thought are not present.
To be in consciousness and to be apprehended are identical and
it is a matter of no difference whether we speak of this feeling
or feeling this. The first immediacy represents a totality or
continuum holding wholly within its own grasp. Whatever
the object may come to be, it does so through the process in
1 Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p. 261.
J Mind, O. S. Vol. XII, p. 343. Cf. also Bradley, Principles of Logic, p. 457.
'Quoted by Prof. Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. I, p. 25.
THE FIRST IMMEDIACT. J
which it arises. There is no distinction, within this early con-
sciousness, between an object and our perceiving it, and the
resulting construction represents the unity of the object in per-
ception. The knower and his world stand upon the same basis
of reality in undisturbed feeling. Any particular form of sense-
experience is but a modification of the undifferentiated sensory
continuum. As yet there are no distinct forms for the different
senses and whatever of discreteness or discontinuity or variety
may be found within this early experience must be sought for
on the side of the sensory content. This content both stimulates
the active processes of the individual and serves as a center
around which these processes gather. Things and not isolated
sensations thus come to be the first results reached by conscious-
ness and while in this first experience there is no distinction to
be drawn between things and thought, things are nevertheless
to be regarded as havingthe unity of objects in perception. What-
ever the presented object comes to be it represents thus an
immediate unity of consciousness.
Emphasis is laid upon this first immediacy of consciousness
in the present discussion since, by almost universal agreement,
it is regarded as the type of consciousness in which we are
brought into closest contact with what later becomes the coeffi-
cient of reality. Present-day metaphysicians are almost unani-
mous in maintaining that reality as an absolute experience is
realized only is some form of immediacy of consciousness.
Bradley explicitly holds that reality is a matter of immediate
experience and his further characterization of such immediacy
as a state of'sheer sentience,'as a state of undifferentiated feeling,
identifies his absolute experience with this first immediacy of
consciousness. 'The will-to-believe' of Professor James and
the 'volitional immediacy' of Professor Royce must be inter-
preted in a similar way.
Whether this first immediacy of consciousness be identified
with reality as an absolute experience and all else made phe-
nomenal, or used only as a type of experience in which reality
is actually given, the fact remains that the analysis of this
a-dualistic consciousness has been motived by certain meta-
physical presuppositions. Assuming that reality can be given
4 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
only in an immediacy of consciousness and assuming still further
that this immediacy is due to the absolute simplicity of the
primitive consciousness, metaphysicians at once proceed to
analyze this first immediacy. As a result three types of epistem-
ological theory have been brought forward in modern dis-
cussion, viz., the Intellectualistic, the Affectivistic and the
Voluntaristic, each attempting to make some one aspect of
developed consciousness the explaining principle of conscious
development as well as the sole organ of reality.
Each of these three types of epistemological theory proceeds
upon the assumption that consciousness is, in its primitive stage,
wholly simple, in the sense that only one of the later aspects is
present. Experience thus comes to be regarded as the realiza-
tion of some one principle, that is, in other words, each stage of
conscious experience is but the embodiment in a specific mode
of this one principle and these successive modes in the actualiza-
tion of this one principle differ only in the way in which it is
embodied. Mental development thus becomes the necessary
evolution, through various modes, of a single principle. Hegel's
Phanomenologie des Geistes represents an attempt in this direc-
tion in assuming rationality as the explaining principle of the
mind, while Herbert Spencer's Synthetic Philosophy represents
a similar attempt, although in a wholly antipodal way. The
more modern movement in philosophy generally known as
'Pragmatism,' with its characteristic interpretation of experi-
ence solely in terms of the practical and the identifying of the
true and the beautiful with the good, is to be regarded not only
as a revolt from Hegel and Green but also as an attempt to make
will the explaining principle of mental development and the
organ of reality.1
From an analytical point of view, however, the simplicity of
the first immediacy of consciousness is relative only. Every
presentation is also a determination. From the beginning con-
sciousness is active and constructive. "The so-called imme-
diate intuition," says Green, "has content only in so far as it
1 See James, Pragmatism, p. 76, and also Miss Adams, The Aesthetic Experi-
ence. THE FIRST IMMEDIACT. 5
is not merely preservative."1 Consciousness is never purely
a-noetic. Every 'that' is also a 'what.' What the presented
content is determined to be depends upon the active, disposi-
tional tendencies of the individual. To make these tendencies
absorb the whole of the presented content would make impossi-
ble the later dualisms of thought, while to make the presented
object the determining factor, as the empirical school in general
did, would create an absolute impasse in knowledge. Both
factors are present and operative and the significance of the first
immediacy is that it represents a stage of experience in which
these two aspects of all thought are held together. It is a
psychological truism to-day that nothing can be in conscious-
ness except what consciousness puts in. The unity, however,
of this early consciousness is not a unity won from a disturbed
situation, but the unity of a consciousness that has not lost its
original wholeness. The experience is one in which there are
no spheres of reference and control, since the later distinctions
of self and not-self, and inner and outer, are not present.'
From such interpretation of the rise of consciousness there
can arise no absolute impasse in knowledge. While as yet
there is no distinction of means and end, of interest and datum,
it is nevertheless true that the affective-conative dispositions
seize and determine the presented content in congruity with
themselves. Whatever conflicts may arise between these two
factors in this primitive experience they can be said to be
resolved by the processes creating them. It is precisely here
that we are to seek for the rise of the aesthetic experience, whose
function in the development of thought is the burden of the
present inquiry. The unity of the first immediacy of consci-
ousness represents the merging of the two aspects of thought
which are not as yet distinguished within consciousness. There
is no justification for regarding the first immediacy of con-
sciousness as absolutely simple in character, nor for identifying
it with either of the aspects of reflective thought. What we are
to assume at the outset, is not the duality of subject and object,
1 Prolegomena to Ethics, p. 48 (2<d ed.).
1 R. Adamson, The Development of Modern Philosophy, Vol. II, p. 198.
6 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
but rather their unity. The real problem here, is not as to the
character of the dualism of the perceiver and the perceived, but
rather, as to the kind of unity that precedes them. This
unity, from the present point of view, is to be regarded as the
outcome of the activity of the perceiving subject and not the
unity given it from without, which is the error of the dualistic
theory of knowledge, nor wholly made by itself, which represents
the error of subjective idealism. Confessing our own guilt of
the 'psychologist's fallacy' but which fallacy, after all, becomes
the only guide of the metaphysician (Ormond), it is to be con-
cluded, that the unity of the first immediacy represents a unity
of the active, constructive processes of the individual.1 The
thing perceived is the content of the act of perceiving, while the
processes of perceiving are realized in the thing perceived. The
relation between the two factors is not that between static
entities, each fixed and complete, but a relation of'togetherness'
which, from a higher analytical point of view, represents a sort
of universalization of an otherwise heterogeneous and meaning-
less content. The content of the object of perception thus
becomes a related content, but in this early stage of conscious
development, neither the object nor the relationships establish-
ing it, are distinguished. The content of perception, when
viewed from without, consists essentially of separable and dis-
tinguishable units; but consciousness in its first immediacy gets
no such separable and distinguishable units, but things, 'pro-
jects,' which embody the unity of the primitive consciousness.
Of this early consciousness, before distinctions arise between
content and control, it is to be said that, it acts in its entirety
upon whatever content may be presented. There is as yet no
manipulation of means with reference to a particular end, since
these two aspects of thought are not held apart, but we have
rather what Professor Ormond calls 'spontaneity of will-
effort' which is selective and constructive without prior interest
and purpose. Borrowing Professor Baldwin's formula of atten-
tion, Attention = A, a, a, (in which A stands for the gross
general activities of the attentive process, a the special class of
1 Baldwin, Mental Development, p. 286 (zd ed.).
THE FIRST IMMEDIACr. 7
motor reactions attaching to classes of experiences and a the
finer adjustments within a)1 it is at once to be seen that the
attentive processes of the first immediacy are confined to the ele-
ment A. The controlof the object is thus direct and immediate,
because consciousness being a-dualistic, the process of deter-
mination and construction of the object is a self-contained proc-
ess. The resulting construction thus holds true of the whole
of experience and represents, therefore, a quasi-generaliza-
tion. This, I take it, is precisely what Professor Baldwin has
in view in speaking of these projective constructions as 'con-
cepts of the first degree'2 and Royce as 'vague universals.' All
things are in this sense universal in this first immediacy, since not
only is there no distinction between content and control, but
even the content functions only as a whole. The unity of
consciousness within this early stage may be said to be due to
the fact that the affective-conative tendencies as the control
factor seize, envelope and determine the situation as a whole.
The resulting construction represents a 'projectification' of con-
sciousness in all that it can apprehend. The whole of whatever
meaning is possible to consciousness as yet a-dualistic is given
adequate rendering. From the psychic point of view we are
to regard the control of this early experience as being 'auto-
nomic' in character. The unity thus preserved between these
two factors of primitive thought is rather functional in char-
acter, in the sense that the self is not distinguished from the
inner dispositional processes, thus illustrating the general con-
clusion of modern psychology, that within primitive experience,
motor adjustment is the measure and test of mental unity.
It is also to be pointed out that, within this first immediacy
of consciousness, the distinction of individual and social does
not arise. The life of the individual is largely one of group main-
tenance, and custom, fixed and specific, determines conduct.
Education in primitive societies is largely a matter of handing
1 Mental Development, pp. 313.
2 See Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. I., whose terminology is followed
in the present discussion. In the last edition of Mental Development (1906),
Professor Baldwin applies the term 'Schematic Generals' to these first projective
constructions.
8 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
down traditions. The exclusiveness of primitive society and
the more or less constancy of the environment supplied both a
common content and common control, while both were held in
an undisturbed unity. The resulting constructions are thus
common in character, but since the aspect of commonness
is not psychic to the individual, it is rather to be regarded as
'aggregate.' No personality as such attaches to the con-
structions of this early experience and they are, therefore, to be
regarded as anonymous as well as autonomous and collective in
character. Thus the successful construction of a presented con-
tent makes possible communication with others and not vice
versa as the Pragmatists contend. Moreover, the objectivity
which attaches to the projects of the first immediacy, is not the
result of their being communicable to others, but rather, they
are common possessions precisely because of their being objec-
tive.
In conclusion it is to be said that the significance of this first
immediacy of consciousness is, that it represents a stage of
mental development, in which the several aspects of thought,
while present and operative, are not distinguished, while the
projects, as the resulting constructions, represent attempts at
the maintaining of the equilibrium of stimulus and response,
control and content, by reducing all presented content to terms
of the inner dispositional tendencies. If, therefore, we define
experience to mean the essential unity of subject and object,
and further define such unity as the ideal toward which experi-
ence moves, it becomes evident that, in this first immediacy,
we have to do with the first of the stages in this development.
Within the first immediacy, however, are found the materials
and motives of its own polarization. Characteristic responses
fail to bring the accustomed satisfaction and situations are con-
stantly arising which put to confusion all earlier motor accom-
modations. Varied experiences with objects already familiar
break down the equilibrium of stimulus and response. Thus
while the object remains one, responses to it tend to multiply.
The child's world as one of chance and change, creates at once
the necessity and opportunity of thought. New presentations
gain upon the individual's store of motor adjustments. Means
THE FIRST IMMEDIACT. 9
and end thus fall apart in consciousness and the need arises of
a method whereby they may be brought together. Interest,
which at the first is embodied in the affective-conative dispo-
sitions of the individual, which are not held apart in con-
sciousness from the presented content, may make either of these
two aspects of thought its objective, so that we have what Pro-
fessor Baldwin has named the interest of habit and the interest
of accommodation.1 Each represents a form of control and the
operation of the two forms of control in the presence of a com-
mon content, constitutes the dualism, whose reconciliation
becomes the problem always of a dualistic experience.The
epistemological problem arises only with the dualizing of con-
sciousness, and its solution waits upon the setting up of a com-
plete experience, which, at once explains and completes an
experience otherwise fragmentary—the setting up of a whole
which is not conditioned and controlled by its relations to other
things, but is determined and complete within itself.
The employment of images to meet the demands of situa-
tions other than those in which they were originally given, tends
to separate the images from the process in which they are con-
tained. The memory image, as one bearing the coefficients of
successful conversion back into the original experience, becomes
distinguished from the images of fancy, which no longer possess
conversion value. In a measure it is to be said, that fancy
represents the freedom of memory run riot; it is, indeed, what
Amiel has called it, 'La dimanche de la pensee.' But yet it
seeks to be a-dualistic since while memory objects have no exis-
tence apart from immediate consciousness but find their sphere
of reference beyond themselves, the images of fancy represent,
by a complete removal of all external control, a return to
an immediacy of consciousness. No distinction is made in
fancy between the images wholly fugitive and fleeting, that is,
wholly detached from their suggested termini or end-states, and
the treatment given them in consciousness. As contrasted with
the memory images, however, the dualism of inner and outer
reference maintains itself.
1 Baldwin, Handbook of Psychology, Feeling and Will, ch. vii.
10 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
The significance of the fancy consciousness in the present
connection is, that it represents the setting up of a world in
which consciousness can move freely, freed from the hard facts
of the world of sense-experience and the limitations of memory.
Judged in the light of memory, the fancy constructions are
worthless, but they nevertheless possess positive value in sunder-
ing the two aspects of thought as well as supplying tractable
material upon which consciousness can exercise its dawning
sense of agency and control.
But fancy is not creative. We are to distinguish between
the reproductive imagination and the imagination proper.
Ribot fails to make this distinction in his otherwise valuable
work entitled, Essay on the Creative Imagination. In a general
way it is to be said, that fancy represents the objectification of
consciousness with complete spontaneity. The fancies of the
individual, like the unreflective myths of his primitive ancestors,
are embodiments of an a-dualistic consciousness, thus compre-
hensive and for the time sufficient for all things. "This," as
Sully says, "is the happy age of childhood when a new and
wondrous world created by a lively phantasy (fancy) rivals in
brightness, in distinctness of detail, aye in brightness too, the
nearest spaces of the world on which the bodily eye looks out
before reflection has begun to draw a hard dividing line between
the domain of historical truth and fiction."1
Thus the first immediacy, despite its apparent all-sufficiency,
carries with it its own instability. The complete swing from
memory to fancy makes necessary a return movement. Fancy
errs by its own defect and possesses contrast value only. The
complete detachment of fancy, however, constitutes it a world
apart. As peculiarly inner, it comes to have a persistence and
value peculiar to itself. Consciousness is now beset by rival
claims and the evident need is a completed experience which
finds its control wholly within itself. It is precisely here that
the epistemological problem arises for the first time, which
finds its solution in the 'semblant' consciousness, to the study of
which the next chapter is given.
1 Sully, Studies in Childhood, p. 82.
CHAPTER II.
The Second Immediacy or 'Semblant' Consciousness, as the
Merging of Dualistic or Mediate Controls.
From the standpoint of reflective thought, the development
of cognition is to be defined as an increasing determinateness
of its two factors, content and control.1 The first immediacy
was treated in the preceding chapter, as illustrating a mode in
the development of cognition in which the two aspects of thought,
while present and operative, were not held apart in conscious-
ness. Within such mode of consciousness, undetermined pres-
ence was given all objects. Presentation and determination,
content and control, interest and datum, were held in the most
perfect equilibrium. Reality was a matter of pure feeling,
while the attitude of consciousness toward the object constructed
was one of 'presumption.'2
But, within the first immediacy were found the motives and
the materials of its own polarization. Making the stimulus,
rather than the response, the determining factor in the con-
struction of sense objects, it is to be said further, that the break-
ing down of the original immediacy was due to the presence of
changing stimulations. Memory objects are valuable only in
so far as they bring sense confirmation and dispositional tenden-
cies are recognized apart from their accustomed responses, only
when they fail to reach their accustomed end-state. The pres-
ence of objects which resist immediate treatment, as well as the
irregular behavior of persons, contribute also to the isolation
of the inner as a world in itself. In general it may be said that
the presence of the new and the failure of the old, contribute to
the sundering of the two aspects of knowledge, which until now,
were held in an equilibrium more or less stable. Moreover, the
1 Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. II, Intr.; reprinted in Psychological
Review, Vol. XIII, No. 6, 1906.
* Baldwin (unpublished lectures).
11
12 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
individual's own body has long been the seat of certain definite
experiences of 'storm and stress,' which, as being beyond his
immediate control, come also to be regarded as ambiguous.
Thus far it is to be said that the inner is such, as Professor Bald-
win has pointed out, simply because it is not outer.1 The out-
come of the several movements already indicated, is the gradual
formation of a sphere of images possessing a certain stability
and character of its own. Unlike memory, however, the inner, as
such, lacks all reference beyond itself and does not lead to any-
thing beyond the process in which it is contained.2 As thus
separated from the outer as held in the net of memory the inner
possesses as yet only the characteristics attaching to the images
lying outside the established forms of control.
As the result of the element of detachment attaching to the
memory object, both memory images and fancies come to be
regarded as inner, in the sense of falling within the body of the
individual. But the body is the starting place of the child's
life of exploration and discovery. He has already learned that,
by manipulating his members certain satisfactions are to be
had. The child early imitates and strangely enough, as Pro-
fessor Baldwin has shown, he begins by imitating persons. By
this means, what was at first projective to him in the conduct of
persons, comes to be associated with his own inner life. Imita-
tion thus becomes the method of treatment whereby content
hitherto untractable and capricious is carried over into the
life of the individual. As the result of the absorption of what
was at the first outer by the process of imitation, the inner is
no longer regarded as made up alone of images that have lost
all positive value, but is now recognized as being whatever lends
itself to imitative treatment. Imitation, which is at first organic
in character, comes to be applied to the whole inner content as
detached from the external, and comes to be treated with reference
to the fulfillment of inner purpose. It is evident, that with this
separation of the images as content available for inner treat-
ment, apart from its actual control in the outer, and with the
1 Thought and Things, Vol. I, pp. 90 sq.
1 Ibid.
THE SECOND IMMEDIACT. 13
adoption of imitation as the method of selection and reduction,
knowledge has entered upon a higher mode of determination.
Following the usage of Professor Baldwin we shall speak of
this mode as the 'lower semblant' in which, by the merging of
two sorts of control, consciousness regains a new and higher
immediacy.
The Characteristics of the Semblant Consciousness.
The works of Groos,1 Lloyd Morgan2 and Professor Bald-
win3 in connecting the aesthetic with the play consciousness, have
opened a new epoch in the study of aesthetics, while the epist-
emological value assigned the aesthetic consciousness in Pro-
fessor Baldwin's Thought and Things, supplies an adequate
motive of aesthetic construction. The conviction is general
that the aesthetic consciousness has not arisen to satisfy an
already existing sense of the beautiful.4 This leaves open the
question of the motive of the rise of the aesthetic, which in the
present essay, is found within the general problem of knowl-
edge.
It is quite evident, however, that the role assigned the
aesthetic consciousness in the development of knowledge, depends
wholly upon the characteristics found attaching to it. The
conviction has long held that play is in some way a natural
phenomenon of the mental life of the individual, while the close-
ness of its connection with art has been explicitly recognized
since Schiller. We are not concerned with its biological and
psychological value in the present discussion but rather with its
epistemological value as coming in between the image and the
reflective modes of consciousness, and thus standing mid-way
between the first immediacy which is below reflection and the
higher which extends above it.
According to Herr Groos the several theories of play may be
1 The Play of Animals and The Play of Man (Eng. trans.).
2 Animal Behaviour.
'Social and Ethical Interpretations, p. 148, ff., etc.
4 See Tufts, 'The Genesis of the Aesthetic Categories, 'Decennial Publications
of the University of Chicago, Vol. III.
14 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
reduced to two: the first, dating back to Schiller and brought
forward in more recent times by Herbert Spencer, has been
most adequately defined by Wallaschek. "The surplus vigor in
more highly developed organisms, exceeding what is required
for immediate need, in which play of all kinds takes its rise,
manifesting itself by way of imitation or repetition of all efforts
and exertions essential to the support of the organism."1 Play
thus arises only when an excess store of energy has accrued to
the organism and so has only a negative value to the organism,
while art, as associated with play, comes to be regarded as a
useless luxury—a sort of by-product—possessing no direct
utility whatever for the life of mind or body. Professors
Groos and Baldwin have pointed out certain facts that tell con-
clusively against the 'surplus-energy' theory, and the theory
proposed in its stead corrects the limitations of the former theory
and exhibits the real value of play. Limiting ourselves in the
present connection to the epistemological value of play, it is
said, subject to further elucidation, that the individual must be
playful to be anything more. The several writers on the sub-
ject of play already referred to, have laid stress upon play as a
sort of practice of what the organism already has for the sake of
its retention and advancement. Professor Baldwin has shown
that the method may be used for the advancement of the mental
life as well as the physical and social. The several characteris-
tics of the semblant or play consciousness treated in the present
connection are selected with reference to the emergence of the
epistemological consciousness and to the use made of the
aesthetic, or semblant consciousness, as the organ of imme-
diacy through a merging of two sorts of control.
(/) The Contentofthe Lower Semblant or Play Consciousness.
The inner-outer dualism, whose reconciliation becomes the
epistemological problem of the semblant consciousness, is found to
be a dualism falling within the field of images. Both the images
of fancy and the images of memory are now inner, in the sense
that they are alike materials for imitative treatment. To this
1 The Origin of Music. Quoted by Lloyd Morgan in Animal Behaviour.
THE SECOND IMMEDIACT.
entire psychic field the imitative method is applied, with the
result that the two types of images are redistributed and the
images of fancy, lacking the coefficients of memory which justify
their reference to a determined sphere, retreat again into the
germinating sphere of the subject to which all elseisobject. The
dualism is thus between two classes of objects, only one of which
finds a determined sphere of reference and the epistemological
problem is the erecting of a sphere of reference in which the two
types of images are unified. Images, as Professor Baldwin
has shown, are inner only because they are not outer. Lacking
the coefficients of memory which justify and guarantee whatever
use is made of them, the images of fancy are not available for
imitative treatment. They lack the persistence and represent-
ing character attaching to the memory images and consequently
have no reference apart from the process in which they occur.
Having thus no field of reference, the images of fancy, might,
like the stream, go on forever, but their flow would be aimless
and meaningless. To have meaning and validity there must be
some reference to a sphere of determined existence in which
they hold true.
But only that which already possesses some determination
as holding within a definite sphere of existence can be 'sembled.'
That which lacks determination altogether is not imitable. The
defect of the fancies was their elusiveness. They err by defect.1
But the images of memory are also found to be insufficient in
the light of the demands of an increasing experience. From
an analytical point of view it is to be seen, that we are in the
presence of a real dualism and one which can not be transcended
by ignoring either of its two poles. It is precisely here that we
are to find the value and function of the semblant consciousness
as the organ of reconciliation and unity. Since memory as the
sole sphere of reference and control has proven itself limited, in
the sense that it can not meet the demands of changed and chang-
ing experiences, and since the images of fancy functioning as a
demand for unity and congruity have no field of reference what-
ever, a field of reference must be established in which the demands
1 Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. I, p. 90.
16 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
alike of each are met and reconciled. But such sphere can be
erected only as a projection from a sphere of reference and control
already established, hence only the images of memory as held
under definite coefficients of control are available for semblant
construction. A further meaning is to be reached only by a
reading forward of the present meaning, which is at once the
function and value of the 'sembling' process. The absolute
experience, at any mode of its genetic development, is but a pro-
jection of whatever meanings consciousness has at the time in
question. To extend experience is not to break with experience,
and if reality is to be immediate, it must needs be an immediacy
which completes and merges all present meanings and interests.
To limit the semblant construction to the images of fancy
would at once rob it of all variety and meaning and reduce it to
a sort of empty immediacy, of which illustrations are not lacking
in the history of epistemological theory. On the other hand,
to limit the semblant to the memory images alone, would yield
only a world of discrete and quantitative determination. But
by an inner imitation of meanings already guaranteed, both
aspects of the dualistic experience are at once recognized and
reconciled. The semblant consciousness thus stands as a pro-
test against any one-sided procedure and meets the several
demands of increasing thought, by treating meanings already
established as 'schemata' for the sake of further meaning, which
while not as yet possessed, is nevertheless treated and accepted
as already established. The reality-feeling, characteristic of
the first immediacy, due to the immediate unity of the two
aspects of the constructive process and which was lost in the
mediate control of memory, is again possessed in the 'make-
believe' character of the semblant.
(2) The Control in the 'Semblant' Consciousness.
Defining the development of knowledge as the increasing
determinateness of its two aspects, content and control, the sem-
blant consciousness, as a process of inner imitation, under the
urgency of purpose selective of contents already established, is
to be regarded as the first appearance of a relatively free sub-
THE SECOND 1MMEDIACT. 17
jective control. Within the first immediacy no distinction was
made between these two aspects of thought and the unity is to
be regarded as a 'projection' embodying the affective-disposi-
tional tendencies. Presentations were determined wholly in
terms of what consciousness then possessed. From the vantage
ground of reflection it is to be said, that consciousness, during
its first immediacy, defined its world in terms of undifferentiated
feeling.1 It is further to be said, that within such consciousness,
the emphasis is to be given rather to the subjective aspect.
From the standpoint of the individual the process is 'autonomic,'
since both aspects of thought are as yet involved in a psychic
whole, while from the objective point of view the process is
'foreign,' in the sense that the presented object is the determining
factor of the process. These two factors were detached in
memory, but the mediate character of the control of memory
shows that consciousness is yet a-dualistic. Fancy represented
the detachment of memory become complete, in that a complete
break was made with the outer as the sense-datum. In the
semblant consciousness there is a return to the outer, as held in
memory, but the return is not complete. The content is ac-
cepted as guaranteed by the coefficients of memory, while the
control aspect is to be seen in the fact, that the images are not
used for the sake of regainingthe original sense-control. The con-
tent, thus guaranteed, is used for the sake of fulfilling inner pur-
poses and thus given a determination which it does not have,
but which its control coefficients justify. Consciousness, for
the first time stands apart from its content and treats it with
reference to its own purposes and demands. The semblant
object thus represents an inner construction for inner purposes,
but out of materials determined in earlier modes. It is neither
a fancy object, nor a transcript of the outer as held in memory,
but rather a 'prescript' for the reconciliation and unification of
the claims alike of the two aspects of thought now present and
operative. In fancy, the control aspect attaching to memory
is wholly ignored and while recognized in the semblant is never-
1 Professor Baldwin's 'Reality-feeling.' See Handbook of Psychology: Senses
and Intellect, ch. vii.
18 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
theless lifted from its regular sphere and carried into another.
The content accepted as a 'presumption' in the first immediacy
is now carried temporarily to another sphere for the sake of
further determination and made an 'assumption,' but an
assumption justified by the already present 'presumption.'1 As
in the first immediacy the determination given presented con-
tent was regarded as an attempt upon the part of the inner dis-
positional processes to reduce the presented content into unity
with themselves, so the semblant object is to be looked upon as
an inner control of content with reference to its own embodi-
ment. In the presence of the conflicting claims and demands
of sense and memory, the semblant object, as an inner deter-
mination of presented content, restores unity and hence imme-
diacy of consciousness, by merging these several demands into a
whole that at once transcends and completes both without
ignoring either.
(j) The Immediacy of the Semblant Consciousness.
A third aspect of the semblant consciousness is to be inferred
from the attitude of consciousness toward the object thus con-
structed. Primitive consciousness was held to be only relatively
simple, and its immediacy represented an equilibrium of the as-
pects of knowledge later to be distinguished. The determination
given was found to be the issue of the affective-volitional tendencies
and represented an attempt at a definition of the world in terms
of feeling.2 In the semblant consciousness the several aspects
of thought have fallen asunder and each is present as a sort of
demand peculiar to itself. Each of the two characteristics of
the semblant already indicated has to do with one of the aspects
respectively of the inner-outer dualism of the semblant con-
sciousness. So long as consciousness remains a-dualistic the
world of presented content is taken at its face value and 'things
are what they seem.' Reality is solely a matter of feeling
1 Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. II, chap. i, §4. See Bertrand Russell,
Meinong's 'Theory of Complexes and Assumptions,' Mind, 1904.
* Cf., Reality-feeling: Baldwin, Handbook of Psychology; Feeling and
ch. vii.
THE SECOND IMMEDIACT. 19
or 'presumption,'1 Both the content and the control aspects
were placed upon the same basis of reality. Despite the detach-
ment of the images of memory and their use as possessing con-
version value into real facts of the outer world, the aspect of
control is mediate, in the sense that it is vested in a content lying
outside the control process. Fancies came and went, formed
and dissolved, without prior interest or determination upon the
part of consciousness. As a result no distinction was made
within the field of fancies. But with the isolation of the inner
as material available for imitative treatment, differences at once
arise within the sphere of images between those that have outer
reference and those that do not. The latter, as a sphere of
reference, has as yet only negative value, being made up of
images that can not be imitatively treated. Every image is
determined as belonging to either one of these two spheres, but
can not hold in both. In either case, the disposition of the
images is through a mediational content, which means that the
old-time immediacy is broken down. The obvious need is a
sphere of reference in which the common content is treated with
reference to the demand of the inner. The significance of the
semblant is, that by merging these two aspects of control, it
becomes the organ of a new and higher immediacy.
The semblant consciousness has^objectivity as the first imme-
diacy also had, but an objectivity secured by taking over into
the inner the outer pole of the inner-outer dualism. It is in the
the semblant, therefore, that we are to find the first instance of a
real transcendence upon the part of consciousness, by the erec-
tion of a schematic object in which, for the time, its several
aspects of control are completely harmonized. Thus conscious-
ness transcends its dualistic experience by erecting an object in
which the demand of the inner for unity and of the outer for
consistency and meaning are merged in anew mode of control,
which in turn becomes the organ of immediacy of the two
aspects of knowledge. The semblant consciousness is imme-
diate in character, an experience in which existence and content,
interest and datum are merged into a common unity of reference
1 Ibid.
20 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
and control. In the case of the first immediacy, such unity was
secured and held in the absence of reflective analysis of the given
into its characteristic aspects. In other terms, the first immedi-
acy represents a rendering of the whole of consciousness, in its
as yet unbroken unity, while of the semblant consciousness, it
may be said that, it represents an experience in which the
several aspects of thought are again merged in a complete and
self-sustained whole.
(4) 'Syndoxic' Character of Semblant Constructions.
The three aspects of the semblant consciousness thus far
considered will later be found to be precisely the three criteria
demanded by the several attempts at a solution of the epistemolog-
ical problem of reflective thought, as well as the three aspects of
the aesthetic experience par excellence. But there is another
aspect of the semblant consciousness, viz., its 'commonness,'
which is also a characteristic of both the reflective and the
aesthetic experience. It has already been pointed out, that
the 'projective' constructions of the first immediacy were 'aggre-
gate,' that is, common to the group but not recognized as such
by the individual. The anonymous character of the unreflective
myth has often been noted but not as yet explained. No inquiry
is raised as to the author of myths and fancies, still their value
is not lessened in finding them both anonymous and collective. Professor Baldwin has shown, that memory shows a form of
'secondary' conversion which is essentially social in character.1
He has also pointed out how the individual in play comes to
submit his creations to others for confirmation. The material
thus entering into the semblant constructions is already under
social guarantees and is selected because of its common charac-
ter, while the images of fancy, as being purely private—rein
innerlich—are at one relegated to the limbo of the illusory and
meaningless. The semblant construction thus becomes an
object for general acceptance. It carries with it a demand for
general recognition. It is precisely here that we are to seek for
the aspect of "shareableness' and 'universality' which attaches
1 Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. I, p.
THE SECOND IMMEDIACT. 21
to play and art alike. While the play object may be recognized
by a few only, it nevertheless carries with it that common aspect
which makes it hold for all competent observers. The objective
character of the semblant object, like the projective character
of the myths and fancies of the first immediacy, involves
the aspect of commonness. It is precisely here that we are to
seek for the normative and universal character of the semblant
object.
It is very generally recognized in present-day aesthetic dis-
cussion, that the aesthetic consciousness has arisen from motives
other than a pre-existing love of beauty. The determination of
the motives from whence it has arisen remains as yet an open
problem. Professor Tufts, of the University of Chicago, holds
that we are to seek for the motives of the aesthetic in the field
of social psychology. But Professor Tufts leaves open a still
larger problem as to what makes social progress and intercourse
possible. In the present discussion, following the conclusions
of Professor Baldwin, thought is the matter of the social process
and all thought is necessarily common. Accepting this con-
clusion, we are led to the result, that the motives of the aesthetic
consciousness are to be sought in epistemology rather than soci-
ology. At the several stages of the development of the epistem-
ological consciousness the demand arises for an object which
is not private, but which appeals to all members of the commu-
nity. Thus we found that the fancies and myths of the first
immediacy were 'aggregate' and non-individual. With the rise
of the inner-outer dualism, the need is for an object which at
once meets the demands of the individual and at the same time
demands general recognition. At each successive mode of
determination of thought, the purely private is eliminated and
only materials under the test of secondary conversion, that is,
tested by means of others, become available for imitative treat-
ment. The problem of knowledge thus becomes not'How can
we think things together,'1 but rather how can we manipulate
an already common content for the effective embodiment of
individual meanings and purposes.
1 James, 'How can we Think Things Together ?' Psychological Review,Vol. II,
pp. 1058".
22 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
It is thus seen that the characteristics of the lower semblant
consciousness are precisely those demanded by the epistemolog-
ical problem of the inner-outer dualism, whence the conclusion,
that the two have arisen together, and that the motives and
function of the aesthetic are to be found within the epistemo-
logical. By merging the two aspects of control issuing respec-
tively from the inner and the outer, the aesthetic becomes the
organ of world-unity and world-interpretation. The projects
of the first immediacy were found to be 'synergetic' while the
semblant objects are to be defined as'syntelic'or'contemplative.'1
They are ideal, in the sense that they are neither pure fancies
and thus private and subjective, nor mere transcripts of mem-
ory, which is mediate as to its control, but rather as Professor
Ormond says a 'prescript' of a world in which the selective and
the recognitive are reconciled.2
The semblant object therefore reconciles the inner-outer
dualism by merging the two sorts of control issuing respectively
from the poles of the dualism. It is neither inner nor outer,
but it reconciles and satisfies alike the demands of each. The
remote control of memory is, for the time, released. The con-
trol of the semblant construction is unique, in the sense, that the
material entering into it is lifted, as it were, from its original
control and used for personal purposes. The object thus con-
structed might be real but it is not, though treated 'asif itwere.'
The 'autotelic' character of the control of the constructions of
the first immediacy was found in the fact that these construc-
tions represented an attempt to fashion the presented world in
congruous terms but without conscious separation of the factors
involved. Interest then meant the whole of the affective-con-
ative dispositions. But with the bifurcation of consciousness,
interest may be directed either toward the content as held in
memory, or to the control which is not yet able to function in its
own name. But the very fact of the rise of the semblant object
is indicative of a form of interest which does not terminate
with the already guaranteed content of memory. It is precisely
1 Baldwin, Unpublished Lectures.
* Foundations of Knowledge, ch. ix.
THE SECOND IMMEDIACT. 23
here that we are to seek the rise of the semblant as an attempt
upon the part of consciousness to give expression and embodi-
ment to the interest which gives it birth. The history of aes-
thetics would be simply the history of the rise and development
of this sui generis type of interest. The several historically
recognized art-periods of the world reflect the successive stages
of the embodiment of the self. Within the first immediacy
there is to be found what Vignoli has called "the objectification
of the self in all the phenomena it can perceive."1 But in the
second immediacy, realized in the semblant consciousness, there
is the fusion of two possible controls. Consciousness is now
possessed of spheres of reference, only one of which, memory,
is under its own characteristic coefficients of control. From
this sphere the material of the semblant construction is drawn
since it always gets its materials from the already established.
But this material, as already established, is used in the semblant
consciousness for the sake of a more complete embodiment of
the self, which is accomplished by the self giving it a meaning of
its own and not one guaranteed through something else. The
'reality-feeling' of the first immediacy which is lost in the mediate
character of memory, is again reached in the 'make-believe'
construction of the semblant construction. The self becomes
one with its object in a new and higher immediacy. By a pro-
cess of 'Einfuhling,' a reading of itself into the object, it com-
pletes itself, by setting up an experience in which all motives
and controls are merged. The external world as held in memory
is held up and treated schematically for the sake of further
meaning. The aesthetic experience, at whatever stage of its
development, is therefore an ideal experience in the sense that
it does not mediate the original control. Its meaning is an
imported meaning and comes directly rather than through some-
thing else. The control of the construction is not completely
born of the self since the inner is yet lacking in determination.
The semblant consciousness is, therefore, to be regarded as
quasi-epistemological and the semblant construction in which
new and higher immediacy is reached as quasi-aesthetic.
1 Vignoli, Science and Myth.
CHAPTER III.
The Mediate and Dualistic Character of Reflective Thought as the Outcome of the Lower Semblant and the Prelude to the Higher Semblant or Aesthetic Consciousness.
The epistemological consciousness is dualistic.1 To know
implies and involves a knower as well as something known.
Current epistemological discussion recognizes the subject-
object dualism as the fundamental characteristic of thought.
Inquiry as to the origin, nature and validity of knowledge arise
only with the distinction of these two factors involved in every
conscious construction. Paulsen is justified in the conclusion
that since epistemological discussion arose as critical inquiry
upon metaphysics, it arose late in the history of thought.2 But
it would not be true to say that epistemological inquiry was not
present at a much earlier date than Locke's Essay and Kant's
Critique of Pure Reason. It is neither a matter of chance,
nor arbitrary procedure, that modern philosophical discussion
has gathered about epistemological, rather than metaphysical
inquiries. Theory of knowing rather than theory of being is
now to the fore. If epistemological inquiry did not arise as
an independent discipline until the latter half of the eighteenth
century, it was not due to an absence of the necessary motives
and materials at an earlier period. The fact rather is, that
epistemological inquiries were present long before the name,
and the more exact statement of the problem of knowledge in
modern times, represents the focusing of a long series of con-
verging motives and materials of an epistemological character.
The epistemological consciousness must be treated genet-
ically rather than transversely.3 It arises with the breaking
* Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. I, p. 266, and Vol. II, chaps, xiii—xv;
Bradley, Appearance and Reality, pp. 170, 175.
* Paulsen, Introduction to Philosophy, p. 339.
3 Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. I, p. 12.
24
THE DUALISTIC CHARACTER OF REFLECTION. 25
down of the first immediacy of consciousness and its problem
becomes the erection of an experience in which the dual charac-
ter of thought is merged and a higher immediacy established.
In the preceding chapter it was shown, that the semblant or
play consciousness represented the reconciliation and merging
of two sorts of control.1 With the breaking up of the first imme-
diacy, in which content and control were held in a relatively stable
equilibrium, memory and fancy stood for two possible ways of
treating presented content. Interest, at first identical with the
affective-conative dispositions, and unitary, has also been polar-
ized, so it is possible to speak of an interest of a selective as well
as interest of a recognitive character. These two types of
interest represent two possible attitudes of consciousness toward
its own content. The significance of the semblant conscious-
ness was seen in the fact, that it represented the reconciliation
of these two forms of interest by setting up of a detached and self-
controlled construction.
Before the rise of the semblant, as an inner determination,
the inner possessed value only in contrast with the outer. But
the semblant, as merging both memory and fancy, is neither
a memory object, nor a pure fancy, but in a sense both. The
rise and progressive determination of the semblant supply the
materials and motives of the substantive dualism of reflection.
The sense of agency and control found present in the semblant
becomes completely generalized for all content and functions
as the presupposition of control. The quasi-logical character
of the control of the lower semblant consciousness was found in
the fact that the constructive self was still identified with a
portion of its content. The epistemological consciousness is
reached only when the self as subject is set over against its entire
content.
No adequate solution of the epistemological problem is
possible so long as the subject is identified with some one of
its aspects. With the rise of the mode of reflection, in which
the self is set over against the whole of its content, a content
inclusive of mind and body, each under its own form of control,
1 Ibid., p. 119.
26 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
the epistemological problem becomes the reconciling of a dual-
ism both terms of which are equally under subjective control.
There is no ground whatever for making either mind or body
prior in the solution of the problem, since both have arisen
together. Either apart from the other represents an abstraction
and reality must be inclusive of both. Any form of interaction-
ism makes the problem of knowledge insoluble, while a paral-
lelism of the type that forbids all reconciliation, reduces the
epistemologist to the same extremity.
In the preceding chapters the attempt was made to show,
that the earlier dualistic experiences were transcended in an
imitative treatment by consciousness of the meanings already
acquired. The limitation in each instance was found in the
fact that the constructive self was identified with one term of the
dualism. The semblant consciousness was found to be 'pragma-
telic' in the character of its control, because the materials of its
construction were borrowed from memory. The outer world,
as held in the grasp of memory, was as yet the sole sphere of
reference and control. But with the rise of the subject-object
dualism of reflection, both mind and body are equally objects
of thought and available for imitative treatment. From the
genetic point of view, therefore, the epistemological problem of
reflection can be solved only by a re-statement of the subject-object
dualism for common reflection, which will make possible the trans-
cending and merging of the subject-object dualism. This requires
the same process as that by which the earlier dualisms were also
transcended and merged.
Reflective thought is thus dualistic, since the dualism of sub-
stances has been redistributed, but has not disappeared.
Thought has still to do with two opposed spheres with character-
istic forms of control, the one constituting the content and the
other the judging self. The conflict here is a dualism of control,
both forms of which however, are mediated through a common
content, and the solution of the problem waits upon the erection
of a field of reference and control in which reality is given
immediately, rather than through a mediating content, the
erection of an 'absolute experience in which phenomenal dis-
THE DUALISTIC CHARACTER OF REFLECTION. Z7
tinctions are merged, a whole become immediate at a higher
stage without losing any richness.'1
(/) Dualistic Character of the Content of Reflection.
Defining judgment as the acceptance or rejection of mate-
rials determined in earlier modes of cognition, the content
of the logical mode may be said to be whatever the mind may
think about. The whole content of experience, sense objects,
memory objects, semblant objects, and even fancy objects are
alike objects of thought to the subject which is now set over
against all content as the controlling, directing and organ-
izing factor of experience. Self in this sense may think about
everything and anything.2 But the content of thought is
mediate in character, since judgment, as the redistribution of
earlier meanings, must of necessity accept its content as held under
certain presuppositions of control. Whatever the objects of
thought and whatever use may be made of them, the control of
the sphere from which they are drawn still holds. Judgment
may be selective but is selective of facts only, so that the control
of the judgmental process is beyond the judging self. In the
Kantian sense, judgment is, therefore, regulative rather than
constitutive of experience. It is precisely here, I think, that we
are to seek for the limitation generally recognized as attaching
to thought. Thought, as Bradley says, is always desiring
another than itself, because its content is always in an incom-
plete form,3 and it seeks to possess in its object that whole
character of which it already owns the separate features. But
since such a complete object lies beyond thought, it must
remain forever an Other.4
(2) The Dualistic Control of Thought.
The content of the logical mode thus carries with it certain
determinations due to its having a certain 'make-up.' The
1 Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p. 160.
2 Dewey, Studies in Logical Theory, pp. I and 2.
'Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p. 180.
•Ibid., p. 181.
28 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
character of such determination reflects the stage of develop-
ment which the constructive consciousness has reached. The
aspect of control, as the second factor of conscious construction,
is to be sought for in the process by which presented content is
referred to its appropriate sphere of existence and control. The
aspect of control, therefore, is, in the logical mode, mediate in
the sense that the content is used as holding within a certain
sphere of reference. Truth as the outcome of the logical proc-
ess means precisely reference to a sphere, and thus involves
something to which it is true as well as some one to whom it is
true.1 But in judgment these two are never the same, for if
they were, judgment would be wholly meaningless. There is,
therefore, a real dualism present in judgment, which thought
can not of itself transcend. Mr. Bradley is quite right in say-
ing that thought can not, in its actual processes and results,
transcend the dualism of the 'that' and the 'what.'2 Thought
is relational and discursive, meaning that its control falls outside
the subject, so that Bradley, and the Intellectualists in general,
conclude that the real subject of judgment is reality, that is, a
fuller experience in which thought is absorbed, the predication
of a content consistent with and in entire agreement with the
self. The control aspect of thought, like the content aspect,
thus points forward to a more complete experience, in which
the two aspects are merged and completed. But this represents
the epistemological problem of reflective experience.
(5) The Subject of Thought.
Within the logical mode arises the distinction between the
T and the 'me,' the thinker and the things thought. In our
treatment of the two aspects of thought known as content and
control, we found that both alike pointed forward to an aspect
of the process of thought that was not fully rendered in either
of its two factors. It was found that thought as such was unable
to get its materials into a harmonious system or to establish a
control in which the subject, as the existence factor, and the
1 See Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. II, chap. xiii.
2 Bradley, Appearance and Reality, ch. xv.
THE DUALISTIC CHARACTER OF REFLECTION. 29
predicate, as the content factor, were brought together within
some immediate experience. As a result of this embarrassment
between subject and object, the Intellectualists identify the sub-
ject of judgment with reality as such. Mr. Bradley has shown
that the thinking self can not be identified with any particular
content. Thought thus seems always to be unable to render
its own subject. Mr. Bradley appreciates this fact and goes
over to what may be called an 'a-logical' experience, meaning
an experience in which subject and object are contained in an
immediacy of feeling.1 What Mr. Bradley among the Intellec-
tualists and Professor Royce among the Voluntarists are search-
ing after, is a form of experience in which the self is able to
completely embody itself. The problem becomes the further
reading of present meanings, for the sake of further meanings.
The function of thought is the employment of already estab-
lished forms of control for the sake of increase of knowledge;
but the problem now becomes the employment of already guar-
anteed meanings for the sake of control of future experience.2 The epistemological problem thus becomes the problem of
erecting an experience in which all partial and fragmentary
meanings are made complete and in which the subject finds
itself completely reflected. The first immediacy was main-
tained by the self objectifying itself in all the phenomena it could
perceive. Without the distinction of subject and object, con-
sciousness nevertheless maintained its primitive unity and purity
by reducing the object to the unity of pure feeling. In the
'make-believe' character of the semblant consciousness we
found the merging of two forms of control, by the erection of an
object in which the self identified itself with its object. It is
therefore to this same mode of conscious construction that we
are to turn for a solution of the dualistic experience of reflective
thought.
Summing up the discussion thus far made, it is found that
within the movements of the logical mode we have found two
1 Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p. 172.
2 See Baldwin, 'Thought and Things, Vol. II, chap. xiv, who distinguishes
these two movements as 'knowledge through control' and 'control through
knowledge' respectively.
30 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
types of meaning which were not only not rendered, but for the
rendering of which consciousness within the logical mode was
wholly inadequate. In the first place it was found that the
thinking self could not be rendered in terms of logical thought
and thus remains over as an element of 'intent.' Logical pro-
cedure can take place only within a related content. The
thinker thus finds himself limited to and conditioned by the
material with which he works. His point of view must be
retrospective and his judgments must be of the factual type only.
The personality of the thinker must be as completely lost as is
possible. Formal logic by the use of a series of wholly neutral
symbols represents an attempt to eliminate the personal element
of thought. In the second place we have found that within the
logical mode the control aspect of all thinking remains also
unrendered. But we have also found that it was precisely by
this means that thought was able to reconcile conflicting con-
trols in earlier experiences and thus reach a platform for higher
mental determinations and constructions. The projective con-
structions of the first immediacy were regarded, from the point
of view of the consciousness that had them, as 'presumptions,'
while the constructions of the semblant or play consciousness
were regarded as 'assumptions.' The attitude of consciousness
toward the first type of constructions has been characterized as
'primitive credulity' by Bain and 'reality-feeling' by Baldwin,
meaning a sort of naive acceptance of the object. In the case
of play objects, in which the self stands apart from its objective
constructions, there is a sort of identification of the self with
the object, an acceptance of the object as constructed wholly
for inner, personal purposes. Logic is not a matter of variable
belief and every precaution is taken to rule out this aspect of
thought. But thus far we have seen that consciousness has been
able to unify itself and thus reach a platform for higher mental
determination only by a reading forward of its present store of
meanings and attaching to them meanings which they are not
known to possess but accepting them and treating them as if they
already possessed the meanings thus attached to them. Belief
thus passes into 'faith,' the substance of things held as pos-
sible, the acceptance of something as if its reality were already
realized.
THE DUALISTIC CHARACTER OF REFLECTION. 31
In addition to these two types of meaning which the logical
mode fails to render, Professor Baldwin has pointed out that it
fails also to render certain 'singular' meanings. He points
out, what is a matter of general recognition, that the singular
judgment has been a sort of 'thorn in the flesh' to the logician
and the philosopher alike. Traditional logic finds itself wholly
unable to exhaust this type of meaning and as a result it is
identified in some way with the universal.
The fact appears to be that there are two types of singularity,
which Professor Baldwin has named 'essential' and 'imported'
singularity, only the latter of which is of concern in the present
connection. The first type is 'rendered only in community,'1
whereas the second gives a judgment not of truth but of descrip-
tive assertion. Its singularity is a matter of selection and appre-
ciation, and thus can not be rendered in logical terms.2
There are therefore three types of meaning not rendered by
the developments within the logical mode. Consciousness is
again in the presence of a dualistic experience and the epistem-
ological problem of reflection becomes the problem of erecting
a whole of experience in which these several meanings are
rendered.
The character and place of the ontological problem deter-
mine the character and function of the epistemological and
the several historic types of reality reflect as well the several
types of epistemological theory. Professor Baldwin3 has ar-
ranged those several types of theories of knowledge under two
general types and his classification is here followed. Both types
of theory which he knows respectively as the 'Identity' and the
'Representative' are found to proceed from ontological necessity
rather than psychological analysis. Each alike assumes the
subject-object dualism as the necessary presupposition of reflec-
tive thought and each also attempts to transcend the dualism
1 Baldwin, Thought and Things, Vol. II, chap. xiv, §8; and in the article
'Logical Community and the Difference of Discemib\es,' Psychological Review,
Nov., 1907, Prof. Baldwin shows that it is only by generalizing its successive
appearances that a singular object can be made matter of judgment.
2 Baldwin, loc. cit.,Vol, II, chap, xiv, §4.
'Unpublished Lectures.
32 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
thus established by establishing some sort of correspondence
between thought and reality.
The Identity theories proceed upon the assumption that
thought and its object can not be foreign to each other. The
object of thought must necessarily be the product of thought.
The dualism must therefore fall within the process which is
responsible for its appearance. But since consciousness is
recognized as three-sided, we are to expect that each of the
aspects of consciousness will be made in turn the organ of
knowledge and reality. Accordingly we have with us Intel-
lectualists, Voluntarists, and Mystics or 'Affectivists.' By neg-
lecting the existence aspect of thought, the representatives of
an identity theory of knowledge reduce thought and reality to
a system of 'implications.' That each is unable to carry itself
through, is to be inferred from the fact to be discussed in the
following chapter, that each, in the end, arrives at a conception
of reality in terms of immediate and undifferentiated feeling.
The value of the identity theory resides in the fact that it
represents an attempt to preserve and restore the aesthetic
and religious ideas threatened by the attempts of the empiricists
and finally destroyed by the materialists. But because the
identity theory refuses to accept any object as an item of knowl-
edge which can not be explained by analysis of the subject,
it becomes fixed and static and in the end a purely formal
discipline.
The representative theory of knowledge arises through a
failure of the former type of theories to deal adequately with
the more urgent and vital matter of life and experience. The
rapid development of empiricism is to be found in its keeping
close to experience. The object of thought must be other than
thought, in which 'other' thought must find both its motives
and sanctions. But in either type of theory reality is given
as a fixed system in which, according to the Rationalists, thought
must find its law and goal, while according to the Empiricists,
thought is true only in so far as it adequately represents a world
already organized apart from the knowing mind.
But as in the time of Kant, so also to-day, the conviction is
felt that these two types of theory have run themselves out.
THE DUALJSTIC CHARACTER OF REFLECTION. 33
The fact that the champions of an identity theory of knowledge
find themselves in the presence of an impasse which can be
bridged only by a denial of the validity of the process by which
it is established, reveals both the limitations and the defects of the
theory. These writers proceed upon the assumption that reality
must be one and immediate, but since thought is mediate in char-
acter, reality must, in the end, be gotten in terms of pure feeling.
The Voluntarists also recognize the dualistic character of the
practical life, but a dualism which conduct, as such, can not
transcend, so that the 'other' in terms of which the self completes
itself, must be gotten in an immediacy of the will. Thus in an
indirect way the outcome of the rationalistic movement has
been to arouse and ground the conviction that reality is larger
than thought, and that the final interpretation and unification
of experience will proceed the rather from the affective-volitional
aspect of consciousness.
The outcome of the several attempts to establish a represen-
tative theory of knowledge has been strikingly similar to that of
the former type of theory. Proceeding from an inadequate
notion of experience, the Pragmatists, as the avowed empiricists
of the present time, find the highest type of thought and reality
in undifferentiated and unreflective feeling. The plain man of
the street who does not think but knows, represents the ideal
type of thought. Thought arises only with the collapse of habit
as an equilibrium of stimulus and response, and reality means
simply its successful re-establishment. The upholder of the
Identity theory of knowledge found that reality, as the ultimate
subject of thought, fell outside the process of thought. The
Empiricists, on the contrary, in seeking to emphasize the control
aspect of thought, erred in making the empirical occasion the
sole cause of thought. The lesson to be derived from the failure
of each of these two types of epistemological theory is, that
thought can not bring unity and completeness into its content
without transcending itself. The epistemological problem thus
becomes the problem of transcending the subjective. But the
failure alike of each of the two attempts at a solution of the
epistemological problem already referred to forbids any further
attempt at effecting a solution at the expense of the one or the
other of the two aspects of thought.
34 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
In the present discussion the term experience is used as
applying only to consciousness after the subject-object dualism
has been reached. The Rationalists are quite right in holding
that experience proper connotes conscious relation to something,
that is, the distinction of object, of which the individual is con-
scious, from the mind which is conscious. Such experience is,
however, only of gradual attainment. To identify experience
with the first immediacy, in which thought functions as a self-
contained whole, and make such experience the type of the
ultimate experience, means to reduce the highest conceivable
experience to undifferentiated and unrelated feeling. The
Pragmatists are also right in the contention that thought is a
function within experience, if reflective thought is meant. To
identify reality with an immediacy of consciousness can mean
only that reality is the highest and most complete type of experi-
ence, 'an immediate, self-dependent, all-inclusive individual.'1
Bradley identifies reality with the Absolute as that which is at
once without distinctions and relations. Still later he identifies
reality with 'sheer sentience'—a sort of Nirvana in which all the
attainments of thought disappear in a life-less immediacy. But
to reach such immediacy, the relational side of thought must be
merged, since reality can be had only by getting a 'whole which
is not anything but sentient experience.'2 It is precisely here
that Bradley differs from Green, for while the latter would make
reality a matter of relations, Bradley would make relations a
sort of screen, which thought throws over reality. In the latter
case the attaining of reality means the undoing of thought.
Thus the 'sheer sentience' of Bradley in which the dualistic
character of thought is overcome is an a-logical or mystical
experience—a 'consummation of thought in which thought is
lost.'
Professor Royce in The World and the Individual, reaches a
quite similar conclusion while proceeding from the more active
aspect of consciousness. According to Professor Royce, reality
is that in which the ideas find their complete embodiment and
1 Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p. 179.
2 Ibid., p. 173.
THE DUALISTIC CHARACTER OF REFLECTION. 35
meaning. Every idea, he continues, is as well an act of volition
as of cognition, and possesses thus two meanings, an internal
and an external, the latter being a sort of projection or a reading
forward of the former, a discounting of future experience. The
external meaning as the 'other' is that which the internal mean-
ing seeks for its own realization. What is, or what is real, is
the complete embodiment in individual form and in final fulfil-
ment of the internal meaning of finite ideas.1 Truth is no
longer a matter of identity of subject and object, nor a more or
less adequate representation of an external order of things
existing either in the mind of God (Plato) or in the external
world (Hobbes), but the conformity of an idea as an internal
meaning with its own determined external meaning. "No
finite idea can have or conform to any object save what its own
meaning determines, or seek any meaning or truth but its own
meaning and truth."2 "This final embodiment is the ultimate
object, and the only genuine object, that any present idea seeks
as its Other." In a word, reality thus becomes the fulfilment
of purpose.
"By thus distinguishing sharply between the conscious inter-
nal meaning of an idea and its apparently external meaning,
we get before us" says Professor Royce, "an important way of
stating the problem of knowledge or, in other words, the prob-
lem of the whole relation between Idea and Being."3
But how can the idea as a cognitive state, possessing only
internal meaning, possess itself of an 'other' as an external
meaning, as that which is essential to its own completion?
Bradley, it will be recalled, was confronted with the same prob-
lem and finding that thought as thought is not able to grasp
reality sought deliverance in an a-logical state of 'sheer sen-
tience.' Professor Royce, on the other hand, finding that
thought can not of itself create ideals, since it has to do with the
categories of the true and the false, and holding that reality must
necessarily be ideal in the sense of a more complete experience
1 Royce, The World and the Individual, p. 339.
1 Ibid., p. 340.
3Ibid., p. 27.
36 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
not as yet realized, finds in the moral consciousness the postulate
of reality.
But will represents also a mediate form of experience.
The object of moral conduct is under foreign control, in the
sense that its value is not in itself, but in the end not as yet
attained. Will, therefore, like thought, presupposes a reality
which transcends it, a reality which it is forever pursuing but
is never able to grasp. Professor Royce seeks to avoid the
impasse into which the Intellectualistic position led him at an
earlier period of his philosophic thought, by making reality an
act of will, rather than an act of thought. "To be real," he
says, "means to express in a final and determinate form the whole
meaning and purpose of a system of ideas"1—"A totum simul,
—a single, endlessly wealthy experience."2
But Professor Royce nowhere points out the method by
which the ideas as internal meanings are able to project a farther
experience in which they find their final embodiment. The
'other,' as the object of the life of purpose, can not, in any sense,
be foreign to the self. But the fact remains that every genuine
act of will is actuated by an unrealized idea, hence the conclusion
would seem to follow, that volition as such, can find no place in
experience in which the aspects of existence and ideality, of
the self that is willing and the object willed, are once for all
finally united. Professor Royce appreciates the dualistic char-
acter of will, as well as the unitary character of reality, and in the
end posits an immediacy of will in which the self identifies itself
with the object necessary to its completion.
For both the Intellectualists and the Voluntarists the epistem-
ological problem is the same, the problem of reaching a higher
type of meaning in which the body of present partial and frag-
mentary meanings are explained and completed. Each alike
arrives at the conclusion that reality must always contain a
further aspect which is neither thought nor will and can not be
apprehended under the form of either. Reality therefore can
never be precisely what it is for thought or will. Neither proc1 Royce, The World and the Individual, Vol. I. p. 545.
2 Ibid., p. 546.
THE DUALISTIC CHARACTER OF REFLECTION. 37
ess is complete in itself, whereas reality must be an individual,
all-inclusive whole. Lacking a method whereby consciousness
can reach further meaning upon the basis of meanings already
acquired, both Bradley and Royce find refuge in an immediacy
of feeling. But to reach such a conclusion, each breaks with the
principle which was made at the outset the explaining principle
of the mind and the organ of reality.
In the preceding chapters it has been shown that conscious-
ness is possessed of a method of treatment of its present store of
meanings whereby it may be treated with reference to a more
complete meaning. The dualism of reflection has been preceded
by earlier dualistic experiences in each of which the aesthetic
arose as a means of rendering content as a complete whole.
In the discussion of the logical mode we have found three types
of meaning left over after thought had exhausted itself, hence a
dualism remains upon our hands. Bradley is quite right in
holding that thought can not get its content into a harmonious
system.1 Volition necessarily carries with it the same limitation.
Truth and good alike are under mediate control and are general,
whereas reality is immediate and individual. But these are
precisely the characteristics we found attaching to the semblant
consciousness in its earlier modes and to it we are to return
again as the aesthetic experience par excellence; and we shall
find, upon analysis, that it arises with the epistemological con-
sciousness as the necessary organ of rendering the meanings
that have not been rendered in the logical mode.
1 Appearance and Reality, p. 179.
CHAPTER IV.
The Aesthetic Experience as a Hyper-logical Mode of Con-
sciousness in which the Dualism of the Logical
Mode is Overcome.
In the preceding chapter it was pointed out, that neither
thought nor will is able to exhaust experience. In both types
of conscious experience there is found to be something more
than either thought or will. In either instance reality becomes
that which satisfies both [thought and will and both the
Intellectualists and the Voluntarists reached the common con-
clusion that reality is an immediate, self-dependent and all-
inclusive individual. But since such type of experience can not
be reached either in terms of thought, or of conduct, but is, never-
theless, the final realization of both, it is to be sought for in an
immediacy which is the rather feeling in character. Mr. Brad-
ley has also shown, that reality can not be regarded as a mere
identity of thought and will, but rather the goal toward which
both are striving—an experience in which both thought and will
alike are present not, however, formaliter but eminentur.1
Thus it is to be concluded from the outcome of the intel-
lectualistic and voluntaristic discussions, that reality must
always contain a further aspect which is neither thought nor
will and which can not be fully given in either. Both types
of epistemological theory reach the conclusion that thought and
will are general and mediate, while reality is individual and
immediate. But since neither thought nor will can establish an
experience of such type, both must yield to an immediacy of
feeling, which as being rather a-logical, in the instance of the
Intellectualists and a-volitional, in the instance of the Volun-
tarists, is to be regarded as a mystical outcome.
Current epistemological discussion centers about the prob-
lem presented by the dualism of mind and body as representing
1 See Bradley, Appearance and Reality, pp. 469-485.
38
THE AESTHETIC AS HTPER-LOGICAL. 39
two antithetical substances. Accepting this dualism as a datum
of logical experience, the attempt is made to bring the two
together, either by reducing the one to the other, orby findingsome
third entity which issues in the two aspects of mind and body,
respectively. To accept the dualism as a datum of logical
experience and then attempt to reach a solution by reducing
either one to the other leaves the problem unsolved, while the
setting up of some tertium quid solves the problem by a sort of
'back-door' method. One grows tired reading that mind is a
form of matter, or that matter is an aspect of mind, or still
further that the universe is made up of 'mind-stuff.' To
materialize the spiritual, or spiritualize the material rather
pushes the problem farther back than reaches a solution. The
individual is neither a thinking machine wholly impersonal in
character, nor the creature of unreflective instinct, but has
become conscious of himself as a thinking and acting personal-
ity and refuses to accept any solution of the problem of knowl-
edge in which these two aspects of his nature are so etherealized
or materialized as to lose whatever of vitality and value they
have gained in the development of thought. The individual
having become conscious of himself refuses to believe either in
mutual exclusion, or ultimate antithesis of the two terms of the
dualism. Thought has reached increased determination, not by
the suppression or the elimination of either of its two aspects,
but rather by merging both in a higher sphere of mental deter-
mination.
In the first two chapters above the attempt was made to
show that thought reaches a higher plane of construction
through an imitative treatment of its present store of meanings.
The aspect of unity, what Bradley and Royce call individuality,
is to be sought for on the side of the controlling self rather than
of the controlled content. The more or less mystical outcome of
the epistemological theories of Bradley and Royce (mystical in
the sense of affectivistic) is the necessary outcome of any
attempt to solve the epistemological problem by identifying the
self, as the control moment of thought, with any one of its sev-
eral aspects. Historically speaking, it is to be said that epistemo-
logical discussion has completely boxed the compass in that each
40 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
of the several aspects of developed consciousness has, in turn,
been made the explaining principle ot the mind and the organ of
reality.
Each of the three types of epistemological theory referred to
in the preceding paragraph is found to emphasize some one
aspect of what later will be found to be the final interpretation of
reality. The element of value in each particular theory repre-
sents also the limitations of the remaining types of theory. A
more satisfactory theory of reality is to be reached, not by mak-
ing a sort of composite picture of the three types of theory, but
rather by the discovery of a mode of conscious determination
in which the several claims of these otherwise partial and frag-
mentary theories are met and merged.
The Intellectualists maintained and still maintain, that the
subject and object must be identical. "If" says Bosanquet,
"the object-matter of reality lay genuinely outside the system
of thought, not our analysis only, but thought itself, would be
unable to lay hold of reality."1 All knowledge is a product of
thought in that it represents an immanent evolution from certain
a priori principles which are neither derived from nor verified
by experience. Experience is from one end to the other a
realization of a spiritual principle. Thought can not exist
apart from its object, nor can the object of thought exist apart
from thought for which it is object. On any dualistic theory of
knowledge, truth must mean some kind of agreement between
opposed factors, which while opposed come into some sort of
relation. This relation is generally spoken of as the reference of
ideas to a reality beyond ideas.2 The reference, however, is on
the side of the knowing subject, while it also carries with it the
conception of a real which always remains in some sense,
external. But, the Intellectualists insist, while knowledge refers
to reality, reality also refers to knowledge, that is, truth is a
matter of accepted reference on the one side and an accurate
reference on the other.3 The two references thus always concur,
1 Bosanquet, Logic, Vol. I, p. 2.
JCf. Bradley's definition of judgment, Principles of Logic, ch. i.
8 See Baillie, Idealistic Construction of Experience, pp. 64.
THE AESTHETIC AS HTPER-LOGICAL. 41
since the dualism of subject and external object falls within the
knowing process as mode of conscious activity. The distinc-
tion of subject and object is experience broken up into its diver-
sity. The object as such is neither external nor internal for
either term would make the problem of knowledge insoluble.
The dualism, in fact, is the creation of experience itself. Such
dualistic experience is, however, a wound, but a wound of con-
sciousness' own making and truth represents the attempt upon
the part of consciousness to heal the wound homceopathically.1
The ideal experience represents that mode of conscious deter-
mination in which the mind as the subject has itself as a whole
consciously before it. The problem of knowledge thus becomes
the setting up of the ideal experience at the successive stages in
the development of thought—a problem which Hegel, the
'Father of the School,' solved in terms of the aesthetic, while his
later followers find the solution in an immediacy in which the
two aspects of thought are brought into unity. The point of
special emphasis in the present connection is, that the Intellect-
ualists sought to harmonize the entire content of thought by
identifying the two aspects of conscious determination. The
object of knowledge must, therefore, be of the subject's own
construction, in which the subject finds itself fully realized.
The outcome of the Intellectualistic movement was the
setting in of what HofFding calls 'the logical ice-age,' and from
which Voluntarism represents a reaction. It at once occurs
that a thorough-going Intellectualism rates all purpose and value
low. Following the Second Critique of Kant, the Voluntarists
make the will the primary and constitutive function of con-
sciousness and reality a matter of will-acts (Thathandlungen)
rather than ideas. Thought to be vital and valuable must, they
hold, be selective and purposive, and both these aspects of con-
scious experience are ignored in a rationalistic theory of knowl-
edge. The object of knowledge to be real, must be something
more than an object already identified with the subject in cog-
nition. The object of knowledge must be in a real sense an
'Other.' To say that the object must become content of the
1 Bradley, Appearance and Reality, p. 166.
42 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
self before it can become the object of thought makes an act of
will an empty procedure. But reality is larger than thought,
and back of thought lies a deeper part of the self. The cate-
gories of the will are more potent than the categories of thought.
Reality is not something already given in a related content which
only awaits further analysis, but something which we are striving
to bring into being. Furthermore, reality is always ideal, in
the sense that it represents that after which consciousness is
aspiring in order to clothe itself with unity and completeness.
The real significance of the Voluntaristic movement is the
emphasis placed upon the concrete and ethical character of
thought. By their insistence upon the relational and discur-
sive character of reflective thought to the complete exclusion of
the existential import, the Intellectualists reduced thought to a
wholly formal procedure and made the object the conclusion of
a syllogistic process. But, as has been pointed out already,
thought is never able to render harmoniously its own content.
The meaning which connects the several phases of thought and
adds unity to the process as a whole is found in the ideal of a
completely individual experience, of which the several phases of
thought are expressions. There can, therefore, be no real prog-
ress in thought, and truth and fact are identical, since thought
is a self-contained process. That, however, which unifies thought
in the sense of organizing and holding it together suggests alike
the inadequacy of the Intellectualists and the starting point
of the Voluntarists.
The Voluntaristic movement represents an attempt to render
the 'intent' aspect of thought. The object of knowledge as that
which will complete an otherwise inharmonious and incomplete
experience, must be something more than an already contained
experience, but rather that which calls forth effort for its posses-
sion, and in the possession of which consciousness experiences
a positive widening of its active-emotional life. The 'other'
of thought, as Professor Royce has pointed out, is precisely that
which thought must needs have for its own complete realization.
The object of thought must necessarily be beyond thought's
present attainment or it becomes valueless either as object of
thought or of moral endeavor.
THE AESTHETIC AS HTPER-LOGICAL. 43
But the practical life, like the theoretical, is also under a
mediate form of control and the moral consciousness can no more
realize its inner, organizing, controlling principle than can the
theoretical consciousness. Each alike necessitates an absolute
experience which is neither thought nor conduct, but an experi-
ence of an individual whole in which both thought and voli-
tion are lost in a higher immediacy. For the Intellectualists
each phase of thought is significant and finds its interpretation
only in so far as it represents a reflection of a higher expe-
rience. The ideal experience would be that in which the sub-
ject has itself as a whole consciously before it, or as Baillie has
expressed it, "it would be the form of knowledge in which the
object is the mind itself. But such experience is the condition
which makes knowledge possible at any stage whatsoever, and
is not merely the goal toward which the several modes of knowl-
edge point, but the very principle which makes them what they
are for finite consciousness."1 But the problem at once arises,
the epistemological problem par excellence for the Intellectual-
ists, as to how any particular stage of experience as finite and
fragmentary, can reflect a more complete experience. It will
be recalled that Hegel made use of the art-consciousness as a
sort of mirror in which the ideal experience was reflected, while
Bradley and Bosanquet respectively fall back upon 'sentient
experience' and a 'pure act of faith.' The Voluntarists are con-
fronted by the same problem as to how present finite acts of will
can reflect an experience in which the life of will is fully realized—
an experience of 'purposiveness without purpose.'2 In a later
chapter it is shown how the earlier Voluntarists like Fichte and
Schopenhauer made use of the aesthetic consciousness as setting
up an experience in which the active life finds an object in which
all its aspirations and appreciations are fully reflected, while in
our day Professor Royce, as an avowed Voluntarist, finds the
absolute experience in a 'volitional immediacy.' Thus it is
seen that while the epistemological problem was the same for
these two types of epistemological theory, they also arrived at
1 Baillie, Idealistic Construction of Experience, p. 85.
2 Kant, Krit. d. Urieilskraft, p. 87.
44 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
similar solutions. The immediate experience embodied in an
individual form represents an attempt to unify and thus com-
plete an otherwise mediate and incomplete experience by setting
up an experience in which subject and object are completely
merged in an all-embracing unity. Thus, the true and the good
are transcended and completed in a whole of undifferentiated
and unrelated feeling.
The character of the absolute experience thus reached proves,
however, to be more or less meaningless and empty, since it
has completely broken with the earlier partial meanings. The
subject alike in thought and conduct is more than either. Both
demand an 'other,' and such 'other' constitutes reality only in so
far as it contains what at once puts an end to all thinking and
willing. But in attaining this 'other' both thought and volition
lose their essential character. Bradley seeks a way out of the
difficulty thus presented by saying that the 'other' which thought
is always seeking but which remains forever beyond thought is
its own completion. "Thought," he says "can form the idea
of an apprehension, something like feeling in directness, which
contains all the character sought by its relational efforts.
Thought can understand that, to reach its goal, it must get
beyond relations. Yet in its nature it can find no working
means of progress. Hence it perceives that somehow this rela-
tional side of its nature must be merged and must include some-
how the other side. Such a fusion would compel thought to lose
and to transcend its proper self.1 And the nature of this fusion
thought can apprehend in vague generality, but not in detail;
and it can see the reason why a detailed apprehension is impos-
sible. Such anticipated self-transcendence is an 'other;' but
to assert that 'other' is not a self-contradiction."2 But lacking
a method of treating thought with reference to its own advance-
ment, Mr. Bradley in the end sets up a conception of reality
which is a-logical in character. The 'will-to-believe' of Pro-
fessor James, 'the pure act of faith' of Bosanquet and the
'volitional immediacy' of Royce, are to be regarded also as
1 Bradley, Appearance and Reality, pp. 181, 182.
2 Ibid., p. 182.
THE AESTHETIC AS HTPER-LOGICAL. 45
postulates of reality of an a-logical or affectivistic character.
With both types of theory the problem becomes the construction
of a single whole of experience under some mode of conscious
construction in which present finite meanings find themselves
completely unified and realized.
In the preceding chapters the attempt has been made to
show that consciousness is possessed of such a method whereby
present guaranteed meanings may be treated with reference to
further meaning. The first immediacy was found to represent
a single whole of experience due to the fact that the affective-
conative dispositions seized and determined the whole of the
presented content. The resulting unity of this early experience,
embodied in the 'schematic general,' under a form of naive
acceptance as an act of 'presumption,' represents in germ
the two aspects of all thought, which, while already present and
operative, have not been distinguished. Reality, in this early
undifferentiated experience, is the 'projective construction'
which represents the unity of the object in perception. The
unity of the thing perceived represents the unity of the act of
perceiving, or, in still other words, the unity of the thing per-
ceived represents a specific activity of the perceiving subject.
The unity of the projective consciousness is not given in the
presented content, nor, on the other hand is it wholly made by
the consciousness that has it, but the unitary character of the
first immediacy, represents the realization, in a definite form,
of the active-dispositional tendencies as a sort of embryonic
self.
The significance of the 'lower semblant' or play conscious-
ness was found in the fact that it is conscious of the merging of the
two aspects of thought which were not held apart within the
first immediacy. Imitation, as a method of manipulating a
guaranteed content with reference to the fulfilment and embodi-
ment of inner purpose, is now consciously applied to whatever
content consciousness has. We found that 'semblant' control
was not direct and mediate as in memory, but the content
guaranteed in memory is lifted from its original moorings and
used with reference to the fulfilment of dispositional tendencies.
Play thus becomes a sort of self-contained process in the sense
46 THE AESTHETIC EXPERIENCE.
that it finds its end in the process itself. It is indulged for its
own sake and hence lacks all conscious utilitarian or experi-
mental value. There is complete identification of the player
with the object thus constructed—a reading-in, as it were,
of the person of the player into the object thus constructed. As
the 'projective' construction arises in an undifferentiated ex-
perience, so the semblant object represents an object, which
while not true to any established form of control, is nevertheless
accepted and treated 'as if it were' real. It is evident that we
are in the presence of an wholly new form of control—a control
of an already guaranteed content in the form of a completed
whole of content. There is a detachment of the self from the
stern realities of real life whose limitations are transcended by
the erecting of an experience, not as yet realized, but which can
nevertheless be treated as if it were already realized. The sem-
blant construction thus becomes a personal, all-inclusive, self-
contained construction, in which the self as the controlling and
organizing principle of thought reaches, by a process of merg-
ing and unifying the several aspects of thought, a new and
higher plane of mental determination.
Having shown that, in the earlier modes of consciousness
the aesthetic and the epistemological arose together, and that
the former was found in each instance to possess those charac-
teristics demanded by the latter—whence the conclusion that the
aesthetic experience functions as an epistemological postulate—
it now remains to show that the aesthetic experience, when once
reflective thought is reached, still possesses the characteristics
which make possible a solution of the epistemological problem
of reflective thought. Making use of the generally recognized
characteristics of the aesthetic experience we will now show that
the aesthetic experience possesses precisely those characteristics
which qualify it to render the three types of meaning which the
logical mode as such is unable to render.1
1 In this procedure, and in the results, the writer is following Professor
Baldwin's unpublished lectures in which he has presented some of the material
of the third volume of his work Thought and Things.
THE AESTHETIC AS HTPER-LOGICAL. 47
(/) The Objectivity of the Aesthetic Experience.
The failure alike of the Rationalists and the Empiricists to
arrive at a satisfactory theory of knowledge is to be found in the
fact that each starts with an assumption which lies outside the
accepted analysis of knowledge, but which has nevertheless to
be admitted into the result as the underlying presupposition.
Hegel was wholly justified in describing Kant's theory of knowl-
edge as but another expression of Lockeanism. Both assume
a dualism of subject and object which must somehow be main-
tained. It is of interest to note in passing, that the correction of
each took an idealistic direction; for as Berkleianism represents
an attempt to remove the unknown substratum of the thing sub-
stance and to show that cognitive experience can get on without
it, so the critical successors of Kant attempt to drop the 'Ding-
an-sich.' For both Locke and Kant, knowledge must find its
standard beyond itself in the sense that reality is necessarily
larger than thought. This same position is reflected in the
statement of Lotze that 'reality is richer than thought' and in
that of Bradley that 'knowledge is unequal to reality,' or still
again in the statement of Kant that 'beyond the bounds of
knowledge there is a sphere of faith.' All these expressions are
based upon the same presupposition, that thought implicates
always a reality beyond itself. But it at once appears that reality
beyond thought is not only unknowable but valueless; for
either knowledge determines reality, in which case the nature
of reality falls within the limits of thought, or there is, from the
outset, a fundamental cleavage between knowledge and reality
which can never be healed by either. The significance of the
Intellectual movement is to be sought in the fundamental pre-
supposition that knowledge must, in some way, determine its
own conditions, that is, it must be a self-contained experience.
The object of knowledge can be neither external nor inter-
nal; it is not the product of interaction between subject and
object, but rather a unity reflected in the object as constructed
within consciousness. The 'projects' of the first immediacy
represented a unitary experience secured and held in terms of
'motor synergy.' While within this early consciousness pro-
