


1
E P I S T E M O L O G Y
OR THE
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
AN INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL METAPHYSICS
BY
P. COFFEY, Ph.D. (Louvain)
PROFESSOR OF LOGIC anD MbTaPHYSICS, MaYnOOTH COLLbGF-, IRbLanD
IN TWO VOLUMES
Vol. II
PART IV. THE DATA OF INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE;
SENSE PERCEPTION
PART V. TRUTH AND CERTITUDE: THEIR CRITERIA
AND MOTIVES
LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
FOURTH AVENUE & 30th STREET, NEW YORK
BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, AND MADRAS
1917
CONTENTS OF VOLUME II.
PART IV.
THE DATA OF INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE; SENSE
PERCEPTION.
CHAPTER XIII.
Self-Consciousness and Memory.
PAoK
95. Transition to Sense Perception. Terms and Distinctions ... 1
96. Data, Interpretations, and Implications of Consciousness ... 2
97. Truths Revealed by Introspective Rational Analysis of the Data of
Consciousness 5
98. Memory, Self-Identity, and Time Duration 10
99. Truths Revealed by Introspective Rational Analysis of the Data of
Memory 12
100. Consciousness of Self and Cognition ol the External Universe . . 15
CHAPTER XIV.
EXTRaMbnTaL RbaLITY. THE EXTERNaL UNIVbRSb.
101. Reality of the Cognitive Acts or States of the " Ego," compared with
Reality of their Objects' ig
102. Is the Reality (" Esse") of Conscious States Identical with their Ap-
prehension (" Percipi")? 21
103. Alternative Methods of Justifying Spontaneous Belief in the Existence
of an External Material Universe. (A) Transition Effected by Appeal
to the Principle of Causality 2.1
104. Criticism of First Alternative 26
105. (B) Spontaneous Conviction of the Existence of an External Material
Universe Rationally Justified by Intellectual Reflection on the
Nature and Characteristics of External Sense Data . .31
CHAPTER XV.
Validity of Sense Perception: Real Existence of an External, Material
Universe.
106. The Facts of Sense Perception 37
107. Their Psychological Explanation and their Significance for Epistemology 3g
108. The Problems and the Theories 41
v
373980
vi
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
109. Direct Vindication of Belief in the Real Existence of a Mind-Independent,
External, Extended, Material Universe 44
110. Solution of the General "A Priori" Difficulty of Idealism against this
Belief 46
in. Indirect Confirmation of this Belief by Appeal to the Principle of
Causality 51
CHAPTER XVI.
Perception of Sense Qualities.
112. Two Realist Theories of Sense Perception 64
113. Their Bearing on the Problem of its Validity 69
114. Relation of "Proper" and "Common" Sensibles, of " Sensibilia per
se " and "iSensibilia per accidens," to Intellect .... 75
115. Extramental Reality of the " Common " Sensibles, or " Primary" Sense
Qualities, Vindicated 81
116. Distinction of the Perceiver's Organism or Body from the " External"
Universe 86
CHAPTER XVII.
Relativity of Sbnse Qualities to Perceiver.
117. R6Ie of Perceiver's Organism as Partial Determinant of " External"
Sense Qualities 89
118. Relativity of External Sense Qualities to Perceiver's Organism. Sense
Illusions and Deceptions. "Infallibility" of Perception gi
ng. Conditions of " Normal" and " Abnormal " Sense Perception . . 95
120. Epistemological Import of the Distinction 97
121. The Nature of External Sense Perception Involves Relativity of all Ex-
ternal Sense Qualities (including Concrete Externality itself) to
Perceiver's Organism 99
CHAPTER XVIII.
External Reality of All Sense Qualities Vindicated. "Hyperphysical
Idealism" and "Physical Realism ".
122. In Normal Conditions of Perception Organic Relativity is Compatible
with External Reality of Sense Qualities 104
123. Secondary Sense Qualities are no less Externally Real and no more De-
pendent on Perceiver for what they are Perceived to be, than Primary
Qualities. Berkeley's Immaterialism 107
124. Physical Science and the Sense Qualities. Presuppositions of Scientific
Theories. Physical Realism 124
CHAPTER XIX.
Subjective Idealism, Inferential Realism, and Intuitive Realism.
125. Idealism and the Sense Qualities: Abuse of "Inference by Similarity"
from " Representations" 139
126. General Difficulties against Critical Perceptionism 151
127. The Main Difficulty 159
TABLE OF CONTENTS
vii
CHAPTER XX.
Idealism and the Distinction between "Appearance" and " Reality".
paoi
128. Analysis of the Distinction between what Things "Are" and what they
"Appear" 167
129. How Kant derives Two "Things " from One "Appearing Thing" . 177
CHAPTER XXI.
Kant's Theory op Sense Perception, Space and Time.
130. General View of Kant's Doctrine of Sense Perception .... 184
131. Kant's Account of " Forms of Intuition " Confused and Ambiguous . 187
132. Space not an " A Priori" Perception. Analysis of Kant's Arguments . 190
133. Space not a Property of Mere Mental Appearances or Phenomena, but
of M aterial Realities 196
134. Kant's Doctrine of Time as an "A Priori" Form of " Internal " Per-
ception 202
PART V.
TRUTH AND CERTITUDE: THEIR CRITERIA AND MOTIVES.
CHAPTER XXII.
Retrospect. Relativist Theories of Knowledge.
135. The Relativity of Knowledge. True and False Relativisms . . . 208
136. Epistemological Significance of Distinction Between Sense and Intellect 212
137. Validity of Concepts Reviewed 216
138. Truth of Contingent Judgments Absolute 219
139. Truth of Necessary Judgments Absolute 222
140. Some Relativist Difficulties 225
141. Scholasticism and Kantian Relativism 228
142. The Evolutionary Form of Relativism 232
143. Truths Overlooked or Perverted in the Evolutionary Theory . . . 235
144. Criticism of the Theory 238
CHAPTER XXIII.
Truth and Evidence.
145. Objectivity and Truth 245
146. Definition of Truth . I 248
147. The Objective Term of the Truth-Relation is Extramental, Real and
Attainable 231
148. Criteria of Truth and Motives of Certitude 255
149. Evidence as the Supreme Criterion of Truth and the Ultimate Motive
of Certitude 261
150. Application of the Doctrine to Mediate Evidence 263
151. Application to Immediate Sense Evidence 265
152. Application to Immediate Evidence of Principles of the Ideal Order . 271
153. "Testing" Evidence. Infallibility of Intellect 273
154. Reflection Shows the Cogent Evidence for Spontaneous Assents to be
Sufficient Evidence for Reasoned Certitude 277
viii
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER XXIV.
Other Intellectualist Theories of Certitude. Traditionalism.
PAGE
155. Other Tests. Spencer. Descartes. Circular Theories . . . 281
156. Consistency as a Test of Truth. Relativist and Hegelian Conceptions
of Truth as Consistency ......... 284
157. Fideism: Historical Causes 290
158. Exposition of Traditionalist Theories 293
159. General Criticism of Traditionalist Theories 298
160. Examination of De Bonald's Theory 300
i6r. Theory of De Lamennais Examined. General Assent as a Test of
Truth 303
162. "Common Sense" as a Criterion: the Scottish School. Natural In-
telligence and Concrete Evidence 307
163. Modified Traditionalism. Its Soul of Truth. Traditionalism, Rational-
ism, and Catholic Teaching 311
CHAPTER XXV.
Anti-Intellectualist Theories. Kant's Moral Dogmatism. Pragmatism
and Humanism.
164. Some Illustrations of Anti-Intellectualist Theories of Certitude. General
Argument against Sentimentalist and Voluntarist Theories . . 318
165. Voluntarist Objections. Misconception of Intellectualism . . . 322
166. Kant's Moral Dogmatism of the Practical Reason 326
167. Critique of Moral Dogmatism. The " Categorical Imperative " and its
Implications 330
168. The Two Critiques Compared. Inconsistencies of Kant's System as a
Whole 336
169. Later Anti-Intellectualist Theories: Social Dogmatism. Christian
Apologetics 344
170. Outjjne of Pragmatism and Humanism 353
171. General Arguments against Pragmatism 357
172. The Pragmatist Criterion Examined. Special Argument Outlined . 359
173. Conclusion. Possibility and Sources of Error. The Problems of
Epistemology 366
Index 373
PART IV.
THE DATA OF INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE; SENSE
PERCEPTION.
CHAPTER XIII.
self-consciousness and memory.
95. Transition to Sense Perception. Terms and
Distinctions.—When examining the terms and data of our
general inquiry in the opening chapter, we distinguished (8) be-
tween knowledge proper and mere consciousness; between reflex
consciousness and the implicit, concomitant awareness which
the conscious subject necessarily has of itself in all its conscious
states or activities, without which these could not be conscious,
and which is usually described as direct consciousness; between
non-cognitive (volitional, emotional, etc.) and cognitive con-
sciousness; between the interpretative objectivity of those cog-
nitive states of consciousness which fall short of judgment, and
the formal or consciously asserted objectivity of the judgment
itself. We have also been obliged, in our exposition of the
doctrines of Descartes, Kant and Scholasticism (77), to discuss at
some length the nature and validity of our awareness of the self
as a concrete, existing, individual reality. Presupposing what
has been said already in those connexions we may be brief in
our present exposition of the cognitive value or significance of
the facts of consciousness and memory,—an exposition which
will serve as a necessary and natural transition from intellectual
knowledge to sense knowledge.
The psychological distinction between intellectual conscious-
ness, whereby we are aware of our intellectual activities such as
thought and volition,—and sense consciousness, whereby we are
aware of our external sense functions and the states and con-
ditions of our bodies,—is not itself a datum of consciousness,
but an inference arising from introspection and based on the
vol. n. 1
2 :THEOR Y OF KNOIVLEDGE
diversity of the objects presented in the conscious states. As an
activity, consciousness of whatsoever kind reveals itself as be-
longing wholly to the one conscious self or Ego.
The distinction between direct and reflex consciousness is
itself a datum of human consciousness: we are aware of the
difference between any direct cognitive act (direct consciousness)
and the act whereby we deliberately make our own conscious
activities (psychological reflection), or their objects (ontological
reflection), the object of special and distinct contemplation. From
the nature of this activity scholastic psychologists infer the im-
material or spiritual nature of the faculty which elicits it,—the
intellect,—for the reason that no cognitive power of the sense
order, functioning through an animated material organ, could
possibly elicit such a reflex cognitive act. Whatever about the
nature of the faculty, or the implications of the fact, of reflex
consciousness, there can at all events be no doubt about the fact
itself.
96. Data, Interpretations, and Implications of Con-
sciousness.—Consciousness, of whatsoever kind, makes us di-
rectly and immediately aware of something,—which "something"
we call the datum or object of consciousness. This, too, is un-
deniable. We may, therefore, describe the insight which con-
sciousness gives us into its object as "intuitive," as a direct and
immediate awareness of the mental presence of something, or of
something as having an esse ideale, a "mental existence" for us.
This raises two points for consideration.
One is that we must consciously apprehend at least some of
the data thus present to us, as really existing or happening; or
. at all events that we must intellectually interpret our consciousness
of some data as revealing the real existence or happening of such
data.1 Otherwise we could have no conception of real existence,
whereas it is a fact of consciousness that we have such a concep-
tion. But sense consciousness, or the mere direct awareness of
something as present, does not itself analyse the implications of
this presence, or reach the distinction between "existing as an
object of consciousness" and " existing really ". It must be in-
tellect,—or, if we may say so, consciousness as intellectual,—that
1 This does not imply anything more than the recognition that the presence of
data in consciousness implies some real existence—at least the real existence of the
conscious or cognitive process. But even this attribution of real existence requires
and implies the operation of intellect.
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMORY
3
makes us aware of the " something present " as " something really
happening or existing ".
A second consideration, then, is this: Since all the objects of
consciousness proper are the conscious mental activities, functions,
processes, states, and conditions of the conscious subject;1 and
since these are all concrete, individual data,—even those of them
that belong to the higher domain of mental life, such as judg-
ments, inferences, volitions, etc.,—it follows that if we describe
our direct consciousness of these latter activities as "intellectual
consciousness," we are according to intellect (in its capacity as
"consciousness") a power of intuitively apprehending "indi-
viduals," viz. our individual mental acts (thoughts, volitions, etc.)
of the higher or spiritual domain (77). If we hold that in ex-
ercising the function of external or internal sense perception, we
are through the sense faculty made concomitantly aware of the act
of perception,2 we may and ought to hold, too, that in exercis-
ing any conscious intellectual function (e.g. conceiving, judging,
reasoning), we are made, through the intellect, indirectly and con-
comitantly aware of this individual function as actually taking
place. Every cognitive act, whether sensuous or intellectual,
must thus concomitantly reveal itself in individuo, to the knowing
subject: not the act apart from its content or object, or apart
from its subject or agent, but the whole concrete experience,
afterwards analysed into agent, act, and object. Intellect would
thus, as consciousness, indirectly reveal an individual thing or
event as existing or happening (viz. the higher mental act in
question: judging, reasoning, willing, etc.); and would then, as
intellect, apprehend the abstract nature or essence of the act, and
go on to analyse its implications as to the nature of the human
faculty, and of the human agent, capable of eliciting such an act.
If, then, the proper object of the human intellect be the natures
or essences of corporeal things, considered in the abstract and as
universal, it must be added that all our intellectual cognition has,
as concomitant object, its own individual acts, not in the abstract,
1 We do not say " I am conscious of a sound," but, " I hear a sound," and, " I
am conscious of hearing it "; nor, " I am conscious of material substance," but, " I
am thinking of material substance," and, " I am conscious of thinking about it";
nor, " I am conscious that two and two are four," but, " I judge or understand, or see
(intellectually) that two and two are four," and, " I am conscious of seeing it ".
2Otherwise it would not be a cognitive act: some degree of such concomitant
awareness of the subjeclum cognoscens is essentially involved in all cognition (S).
4
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
but as the concrete acts of the individual self-conscious Ego ap-
prehending some definite datum or object.
It is commonly said that there are data of consciousness which
all philosophers agree in recognizing as such, as being unques-
tioned and unquestionable, and as forming the starting-points
of all philosophical discussion.1 And this is quite true.2 But
inasmuch as from the very dawn of reason in each of us our in-
tellects have been spontaneously scrutinizing these data, it is not
easy to distinguish between what are really data and what are
interpretations of, and inferences from, the data. And the dif-
ficulty is unavoidably aggravated by the fact that we can discuss
these data only as envisaged in introspection by intellectual
scrutiny. The very terms we use in describing them are terms
which apply to them as conceived by intellect. We have, in fact,
no direct conscious experience of these data as they would ap-
pear to a being endowed with sense consciousness alone,—such as
we suppose the lower animals to be. It is only by a careful
and prolonged process of abstraction that we can mentally sepa-
rate our own intellectual interpretation from the data of sense
cognition and sense consciousness, and thus get down to the
ever-changing, fluctuating, ebbing and flowing stream of external
and internal sense impressions which form the elementary con-
tents of sense consciousness. From the standpoint of epistemo-
logy, however, the difficulty of thus discriminating between the
data and our interpretations of them,—or of drawing the distinc-
tion between data of sense consciousness and data of intellectual
consciousness, which is just one example of such interpretation,
—is not a serious difficulty. For in regard to every single
assertion of ours on the matter we must be prepared to show
either that it indisputably expresses a datum of consciousness,
or else that it is an interpretation or inference which really has
all the rational justification we claim for it.
In classifying the data of consciousness which have an im-
mediate bearing on the questions of epistemology, authors com-
monly distinguish3 the direct from the indirect data or objects of
1 There is another necessary presupposition of philosophical discussion, viz. the
presupposition on the part of each participant that the data of every other person's
consciousness is of the same general nature and order as those of his own (§ 39,
vol. i., p. 144, n. 2).
'Cf. §g 37, 39, ibid. *Cf. Jeannjme, op. at., pp. 358-g.
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMORY
5
consciousness. Among the former they enumerate all conscious
acts, processes, states, and modes of the conscious subject, not
apart from, but as concrete, actually existing modes of, the
subject. As indirect object of consciousness they set down
the existing conscious subject as a consciously acting being; but
not the nature of the latter: its nature is revealed not by con-
sciousness but by intellect or reason interpreting consciousness.
Neither, however, is the existence of the conscious subject re-
vealed apart from the existence or happening of the conscious
acts. It is reason or intellect that analyses the whole concrete
datum into acts, states, processes, etc. (accidents), on the one
hand, and an agent, subject (substance), of these on the other;
and which further interprets this subject or substance as corporeal,
living, sentient, rational, etc. And all these interpretations alike
have to be justified. Again, some of our conscious, cognitive
acts, i.e. our external sense perceptions, reveal their objects as
located in space outside our bodies; and others, i.e. some of our
internal sense perceptions, reveal their objects as located more
or less definitely within our bodies. If, therefore, these percep-
tive acts themselves be said to be the direct and proper objects
of consciousness, as being "within " the conscious subject, it must
be admitted that the objects of these perceptive acts themselves
must, as perceived objects, be also indirectly objects of conscious-
ness—even though they be revealed as "outside" the conscious
subject: for by being "presented " or "present" to the conscious
subject, in and through the perceptive act, they become also data
of consciousness. But here again it is intellect or reason that
distinguishes the conscious subject into "mind" and "body";
that recognizes some of the data or objects of conscious cognition
as constituting the Ego and others as constituting the non-Ego
or "external universe "; and that interprets the real significance
of the character of "externality " attaching to the latter, and of
"internality" attaching to the former.
97. Truths Revealed by Introspective Rational An-
alysis of the Data of Consciousness.—We may now proceed
to see what objectively true and valid judgments are yielded by
psychological reflection on the facts of consciousness, (a) They
yield first of all the immediate judgment that "something really
exists," viz. the total, concrete, unanalysed content of the present
conscious state or condition of the conscious subject aware of
something. No sceptic can deny, or ever has denied, the exist-
6
THE OR Y OF KNOWLEDGE
ence of something in and for his consciousness. Sceptics have
doubted—or denied that they can know—whether there is any-
thing that has a reality or real existence other than the esse ideale
which the facts of their consciousness have for them in the actual
conscious state. But since this esse ideale evidently involves the
real existence of the concrete consciousness, or conscious being,—
nay, since this esse ideale is itself something, since it is a real state
or manifestation of some reality,—it follows that even if such
sceptics take up the position of solipsism they must at least
admit the real existence of the concrete conscious self or subject:
not of course as distinct from a non-self or object, but simply as
something real, and as something revealing this distinction or
duality as a problem for investigation.
(b) The data of my consciousness yield as certainly valid and
objectively true the judgment—" /, the thinking or conscious being,
really exist as subject and agent of my conscious states and activ-
ities ". For my consciousness1 reveals these states and activities
as different from one another,—seeing, thinking, speaking, de-
siring, grieving', rejoicing, etc,—but all in the concrete as states,
conditions, activities of one single being, subject, or agent: which
I call myself, the Ego, self, or person.
No doubt, what consciousness, as a mere faculty of awareness
or apprehension, reveals, is one really existing, concrete, complex,
heterogeneous whole of subject and states, agent and activities,
substance and accidents, etc. My consciousness of my existence
does not commence with abstract concepts of "self," "existence,"
"subject," "states," "agent," "activities"; or with a formal act
of judgment affirming the "self" to "exist," or the "states,"
"activities," "accidents," to be those of the "subject," " agent,"
"substance". But all this rational or intellectual process of
analysis and synthesis, of isolating abstract concepts and syn-
thesizing them in judgments, merely expresses and interprets for
me intellectually what was Really and implicitly given to me in
the primitive conscious intuition of the self, consciously existing
and acting.
Descartes rightly pointed out that the Cogito, ergo sum, is not an infer-
ence (31). It is the expression of a self-evident judgment, " I exist," which is
virtually contained in the direct intuition of consciousness. And the same is
true of the other immediate interpretations of the content of this intuition,—
1 Or my consciousness plus my memory, if we take into consideration not only
simultaneous but successive states. Cf. infra, % 98.
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMORY
7
such as "These are conscious states of which I am the subject," "These
are activities of which I am the agent or cause," "These are inhering or
'accident '-entities of which I am the substantive or 'substance '-entity ".
Descartes was right, too, in accepting the evidence, or "clear and distinct
idea," of his existence, as objectively valid, i.e. as revealing to him a really
existing being, though he was inconsistent in questioning the equally cogent
evidence in the case of first principles (31). He was right as against the
phenomenism of sensists and positivists in their unintelligible and self-contra-
dictory assertion that the Ego revealed in consciousness is a mere bundle of
"states" without a subject of these states; or a mere stream of "processes"
or "activities" without an agent or cause of these processes or activities;
or a mere ebb and flow of "phenomena," "appearances," or "accidents,"
without any substantial Ego or being of which they are the phenomena,
appearances, or accidents. And he was right, as against the phenomenism
of Kant, in holding that what the conscious thinking subject apprehends is the
real Ego, at once phenomenal and noumenal, at once sensible and intelli-
gible, at once object of sense and object of intellect,—and not merely a
"phenomenal" or empirically "appearing" product of a real but "trans-
cendental," "unknowable" Ego, for ever hiding itself behind its own mis-
called "appearances".1 The Ego or conscious subject which is revealed in
consciousness is identical with the self which our intellect sees to be a
necessary condition for the possibility of knowledge. According to Kant,
this latter self, in which all our apperceptions must have their unity,2 can in-
deed be thought as real, as a necessary, a priori, transcendental condition of
knowledge; but it cannot be known as real, because we have no intuition of
it: "The consciousness of myself, in the representation of the ego, is not an
intuition, but a merely intellectual representation of the spontaneity of a
thinking subject ".3 In other words, the "I" of the "I think" or "I am
aware," which is an essential concomitant of all cognition (and which, for
intellectual consciousnesses implicitly "I am" or "I exist"), though it is
thought as really existing, cannot be known as really existing: we know it
merely to be something which we are compelled to think as a formal, a priori
condition or unifying principle of all our conscious apperceptions: "No
doubt the representation of / cm, which expresses the consciousness that can
accompany all thought, is that which immediately includes the existence of a
subject: but it does not yet include a knowledge of it, and therefore no
empirical knowledge, that is, experience. For that we require, besides the
thought of something existing, intuition also, and in this case internal intuition
in respect to which, that is, to time, the subject must be determined."1 Thus
1 Cf. infra, § 134. 1 Cf. supra, § 89, vol. i., p. 337.
5 Critique (tr. Muller), p. 781.
*Ibid., p. 680. "For that purpose [time determination of the subject in internal
intuition]," Kant continues (arguing against the " idealism " of Descartes,—cf. vol. i.,
p. 214, n. 1), " external objects are absolutely necessary, so that internal experience
itself is possible, mediately only, and through external experience ". In the same
context he speaks of "the immediate consciousness of the existence of external
things" (ibid., n.), an expression which is intelligible only when we remember
that for him "external things" are mental phenomena. Again, what this " immedi-
ate " " external experience " renders possible, is not "the consciousness of our own
8
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
Kant repeatedly denies that intellectual consciousness, or introspection, or
psychological reflection on the self or Ego as consciously functioning in the
concrete, gives us any intuition, any direct grasp or apprehension, of the real
Ego as thus existing and acting. But such denial is purely gratuitous;
and can be directly met by the positive counter-assertion,—not gratuitous,
but forced upon us both by the most cogent evidence of consciousness and by
the most absolute necessity of thought itself,—that consciousness does reveal
to us intuitively the real existence of the real, consciously acting self or Ego,
as subject and agent of our conscious states and activities.
(c) By reflecting on the conscious and cognitive acts of which
I am the conscious subject, and on the objects of these acts, I see
both acts and objects to be of various kinds, and I classify them
accordingly. The feelings and sensations which I call organic
(e.g. muscular and motor feelings, bodily aches and pains, hunger,
thirst, physical pleasure or discomfort, etc.), and their contents,
I am aware of not merely as different from one another, but, in
the case of some of them at least, as having extensity or spatial
continuity of parts outside parts, and as spatially distant from
others (as e.g. headache and lumbago), and yet all of them as
mine, as affections, states, conditions of myself, and myself the
conscious subject as spatially extended in and with them. No
doubt, this element of extensity or extendedness, directly re-
vealed in the conscious content of organic feelings, is vague and
ill-defined: the definite localization of these feelings being, as
psychologists explain, a result of sense development or sense
"education" through association of the accumulated sense ex-
periences of the individual, and involving intellectual interpreta-
tion and inference. But the element of extensity is there in the
concrete from the beginning; and thus it reveals the self or con-
scious subject as a something which we intellectually apprehend
and designate as a substantive reality having an extended or cor-
poreal mode of being, or, in other words, as a living, conscious,
corporeal substance.
Hence Descartes completely misread the immediate data of
existence," but the "determination" of this consciousness "in time," or in other
words "internal experience " (ibid.): this latter, of course, not attaining to reality
but only to mental appearances. And what is it that renders the consciousness itself
of our own existence possible? Nothing; for on Kant's theory consciousness of our
own real existence is impossible. We can only think this latter as an a priori, trans-
cendental condition of knowledge; but we cannot have knowledge, or empirical
consciousness,—or, if we might so put it, conscious consciousness as distinct from
the Kantian figment of " transcendental consciousness " or "transcendental apper-
ception,"—of our own real existence.
,
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMORY 9
human consciousness when he regarded them as revealing,—or
at least as furnishing grounds for interpreting,—the conscious
human subject or self or Ego, as a simple, unattended, incorporeal,
conscious principle which he identified with soul or spirit.
It is a point of minor importance to observe that it is not
consciousness itself, but intellect interpreting its data, that infers
the nature of the human soul to be simple, spiritual, immortal,
etc., and the nature of the human self or Ego to be a being com-
posed of body and soul. But it is important to insist, against
Descartes and ultra-spiritualists,1 that among the immediate data
of human consciousness is the directly apprehended spatial datum
of extensity or voluminousness of the conscious subject,—which
latter the intellect must therefore interpret as having the corporeal
mode of being, as having in its nature or constitution that which
we call body or matter.2 Whether the distinction which we draw
between our own bodies and external bodies be valid or not, it is
a fact of consciousness that we draw the distinction, and that it
is grounded in the consciously apprehended features of internality
and externality attaching respectively to two classes of directly
apprehended objects.3 But if Descartes' contention were true,—
that the consciously revealed self or Ego is a simple, unextended,
spiritual substance or soul,—then, even though we might perhaps
be able to infer the real existence of a material reality, it is im-
possible to see how we could apprehend our bodies as our own
and as distinct from external bodies: if consciousness did not re-
veal our own bodies as our own no other faculty or mode of cog-
nition could reveal them as such.
Those, then, are the main immediate interpretations of the
facts of consciousness that have a direct bearing on epistemology.
It must be borne in mind, in reference to them, that mere (sense)
consciousness, apart from intellect, simply makes us aware of
subjective facts, without interpreting them. But in man this
1 Cf. Jeanniebe, op. ext., pp. 358, 364-5.
2Similarly, it must be emphasized later (116) that in external sense perception
we are made directly aware of extension, occupation of space, impa%etrability, in that
domain of direct sense cognition or awareness, which, by reason of its apprehended
feature of externality to the self or Ego, each of us marks off from the portion (vit.
bis own body) apprehended by internal sense perception as characterized by inter-
nality, and which each of us designates as the (to him) external material universe.
Here, again, the interpretation of these features of " internality " and " externality"
in the data of direct awareness, as revealing a real universe really distinct from the
self or Ego, is the work of intellect and must be justified by intellect.
» Cf. preceding note.
10
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
awareness is always accompanied by the spontaneous formation
of judgments whereby we interpret the facts. These judgments
impose themselves on us with spontaneous certitude by a psycho-
logical necessity. But we have now seen, by reflection, that these
spontaneous assents are not blind or instinctive. "The facts of
my consciousness have a real existence in and for my conscious-
ness;"1 "My conscious states are real states"; "/ myself, the
conscious subject, really exist"; "My conscious states reveal me
to myself as having not alone the mode of being which thinks,
reasons, judges, but also the mode of being which perceives, and
which I mean by corporeal being"—these judgments impose
themselves upon my reflecting reason with such cogent objective
evidence that I must accept them with reflex, reasoned certitude
as indubitably true: on the assumption, already justified as
against Kant, that my intellect in its processes of conception and
judgment attains not to a subjective, phenomenal disfigurement
of reality, but to reality itself.
98. Memory, Self-Identity, and Time Duration.—
Memory is described by psychologists as the faculty of conserving
and recalling events experienced in the past; of recognizing them
as past, and locating them more or less definitely in the time
series of experienced events. Like consciousness, it is distin-
guished into sensitive, and intellectual or rational, according to
the nature of the events or objects recalled. The distinction is
of minor importance for epistemology, inasmuch as in man
memory is always accompanied by intellectual activity,—interpret-
ing the recalled data, of whatsoever kind these may be. And we
include in memory, as understood here, this faculty of forming
immediate judgments or interpretations of these data. Many of
the truths brought to light by the psychology of memory, which
is both extensive and interesting, have only a remote bearing on
epistemology. But some of the facts and implications of memory,
—especially those which bear on our apprehension of time and
of the self or Ego,—are of the first importance in a general
theory of knowledge.
The process of remembering is itself a conscious process, a
1 It has been pointed out already (18) that "consciousness" is the name of
a state or condition of a conscious subject: it is not really " consciousness" that
apprehends anything: it is " I, the conscious subject," who apprehends by conscious-
ness. We must not hypostasize "consciousness" any more than intellect or
reason.
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMOR Y 11
datum or fact of consciousness. It differs from consciousness in
this that while the latter reports its facts or objects as here and
now actually present, the former reports its objects as having
been experienced, or present to consciousness, in the past. In
other words, the act of memory brings into consciousness an
object or datum marked by a characteristic which is altogether
peculiar and suigeneris, a characteristic which we interpret intel-
lectually as indicating a datum or object experienced before, a feel-
ing of familiarity1 whereby we recognize the present content of
consciousness as being, in part at least, the reproduction or repeti-
tion of a past or previous content of consciousness.2 And inasmuch
as memory reproduces in the concrete the past act as it occurred
in the concrete, it is clear that just as consciousness reveals the
subject as affected by the present conscious states, so, too,
memory reveals the same subject as affected both by the past and
by the present conscious states. The possibility of thus becom-
ing aware of conscious data endowed with this quality of being
"remembered" acts, clearly involves that the subject of such
"reproduced" and "recognized " conscious acts apprehends itself
as having a real existence extended through time-duration, and
as remaining or abiding permanently self-identical throughout
all the changes which such time duration implies.3 Just as we
immediately judge or interpret the direct data of consciousness to
imply the real existence, here and now, of an actual substantial
subject of the conscious states, so we immediately judge or inter-
pret the direct data of memory to imply the reality of the succes-
sion and change in conscious states, the reality and abiding
self-identity of the Ego or subject of those successive states,
and the real objectivity of our concept of time as the mode of
duration of the real existence of the ever-changing real data of
our conscious, cognitive experience.
Obviously there can be no question of demonstrating the
general trustworthiness of memory, in the strict sense of the
term demonstration. For every single step in the process of
demonstration,—from premiss to premiss, and from antecedent
to consequent or conclusion,—implies and rests upon the assumed
1 This is analogous to the feeling of externality which characterizes the data of
external sense perceptions. Cf. § 97, p. 9, n. 2.
2For distinction between actually perceived, and merely imagined, and re-
membered data,cf. Lahr, Cours de philosophie, p. 132,—apud Jeannibre, op. cit.,
p. 370 n.
>C/. Ontology, §§ 74, 75, 85, 86.
I 2
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
trustworthiness of memory. There can be question only ot
reflecting on the concrete data of memory, and on our immedi-
ate intellectual interpretations of those data, and convincing our-
selves that intellect,—which we have already shown (chaps, viii.,
ix.) to be capable of attaining to objective reality through its
concepts and judgments,—has adequate and cogent objective
evidence for the immediate judgments it forms, from those
data, concerning the real existence of an abiding Ego, sub-
stantially self-identical throughout its really changing states,
and the reality of time-duration as a real mode of existence of
these states, their subject, and their contents.
99. Truths Revealed by Introspective Rational
Analysis of the Data of Memory.—In addition to the
concepts formed from the immediate data of consciousness,—con-
cepts of being, existence, subject, substance, agent, body,
extension, mind, action, state, process, accident, etc.,—we
have furnished by memory the data for our concepts of self-
identity, duration, change, succession, time, etc. These are
the concepts we utilize in interpreting the immediate data of
memory. Now we have adequate objective evidence for the
following judgments concerning memory, its data, and their
implications; and these judgments therefore are vindicated by
reflection as objectively valid and certainly true :—
(a) My consciousness reveals some of its contents as familiar,
as repetitions: this character being peculiar to, and inseparable
from, their present appearance in my consciousness. Now,
when I formulate intellectually what is already implicit in
such data, by the explicit judgments, "/ experienced these
data before: they occurred to me in the past: they are events of
my past experience, recalled and recognized by me as such,"—my
intellect is determined to such judgments by the clearest ob-
jective evidence of the very nature itself of my present conscious
state. Therefore such judgments are objectively true; and
their truth is being constantly verified experimentally by their
fitting in with the train of my actual experiences.1
1 The exact location of some remembered events in the time series of past
experiences is given immediately; others are located only indirectly and by
reasoning from the present and from already located events. Here there is room
for error. Moreover, memory has its limits, it does not retain or recall all past
experiences, but comparatively few. Nor is it infallible, any more than intellect
itself; except in regard to its immediate data, as intellect is in regard to im-
mediately evident judgments. Psychology deals with the mistakes and deceptions
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMORY
'J
(b) Since my " remembered " experiences reveal themselves
in the concrete as having been actually mine in the past, and as
now actually reproduced in my present conscious act of remember-
ing, there is manifestly revealed to me in this act the concrete dura-
tion of my own self-identical existence as abiding subject and agent
of these successive conscious states and activities. I thus form
the spontaneous judgment that "I continue in existence, preserving
my substantial, personal self-identity throughout the succession of
real but accidental changes to which this my real existence is
subject"*; and my certitude of the truth of this spontaneous
judgment is confirmed by reflection. For just as I see that
at the present moment of consciousness I cannot be merely a
bundle or collection of states or processes (without any sub-
stantial subject or agent), but that I am concrete subject and
agent of these states and processes, so I see, in and through my
present, conscious act of remembering, that I am the same self-
identical subject who experienced the past datum, and who now
reproduce and recognize it as previously experienced.
In other words, just as the attempts of sensists and positiv-
ists, such as Locke, Hume, Mill, Taine, etc., to explain consciousness
(and knowledge generally) without admitting a real substance, ends
in their substantializing accidents (or consciousness itself2), so their
attempts to explain memory, while denying the real permanence
of the self or subject and holding the latter to be a mere stream
or series of conscious states, ends in such fantastic theories of
personal identity as that of Professor James: that the present
thought (which is the only thinker), or the present conscious
state, "appropriates" the content of the immediately preceding
state and " transmits" this plus its own content to the next suc-
ceeding one,—a theory the unsufficiency of which its propounder
himself admits by recognizing the necessity of postulating some-
of memory. The theses in the text are in no way influenced by the possibility of
such deceptions.
1 The concept of substance, which I thus find realized in my own being, is not
the fanciful notion of an absolutely immutable, hidden, unknowable core or sub-
strate of separate, ever-flowing, evanescent phenomena or accidents,—a fiction
falsely attributed to scholastics by modern sensists and positivists (cf. Ontology,
§ 64). It is the notion of a real mode of being which does not inhere in other being
for its reality; a mode of being the reality and nature of which are revealed in and
through its changing states or accidents; which is subject to (accidental) change
and yet persists really (substantially) the same throughout the change {ibid., §§ 63,
80, pp. 302-3).
2 Cf. Ontology, §g 61, 75.
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
thing "more than the bare fact of the co-existence of a passing
thought with a passing brain-state V
(c) Since the concrete subject or Ego, immediately revealed
in consciousness and memory, is revealed and intellectually in-
terpreted as a really existing being which persists self-identical
throughout a succession of real states, constituting real change, I
have in these concrete data the objective and real contents of
my concepts of duration, succession, and time. Since through con-
sciousness and memory I am aware of myself as undergoing real
change, and of a real succession in my conscious states, I am
aware in the concrete of my own existence as having real and
concrete time duration. This concrete awareness of succession may
be described as an internal perception of time. My intellect,
apprehending from this datum successive duration in the abstract,
forms the abstract concept of time. Thus the concept of time is
objectively real, having its real foundation in the succession in-
volved in real change,—just as we shall see the concept of space
to be likewise objectively real, having its real foundation in the
perceived real extension of bodies.
Time, then, is not a substantive reality, sui generis, distinct
from real change: its reality is the reality of change, but it is
this reality endowed by intellect with the logical features of
abstractness and universality, and the logical relation of measur-
ing the amount of change: it is, in other words, an ens rationis
cum fundamento in re." Neither is time, therefore, on the other
hand a mere "ens rationis," a mere subjective, a priori form of
internal cognition or consciousness, as Kant would have it. The
utter untenability of Kant's doctrine on time will be shown
below (134).
Kant would, of course, urge against all the intellectual interpretations of
the data of consciousness and memory, which we have been vindicating in the
present chapter, the general charge that these interpretations are reached
through concepts, and that concepts can reveal nothing about the reality or
real nature of the self or Ego. Our reply is that they are indeed reached
through concepts, and embodied in judgments, but that we have already
vindicated, against his theory, the real objectivity of conception and judg-
ment.
1 Principles of Psychology, i., p. 346,—apud Maker, Psychology, p. 483. Cf.
Ontology, § 75, pp. 276-84. For further developments of the doctrines of substance,
person, personal identity, permanence of the Ego, time duration, etc., and refutations
of sensist theories, cf. Ontology, chaps, viii. and ix., chap, xi., § 85, 86; Maker, op.
cit., chap. xxii.
*Cf. Ontology, %%S, ?, 3*4-
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMORY
ioo. Consciousness of Self and Cognition of the
External Universe.—Since we become conscious of the self,
and its concrete time-duration, in and through the conscious
activities of the self, and since these conscious activities are in
large part cognitive of that domain of objects or data which we
interpret as the external, spatial, material universe, or the non-Ego,
the question may be asked, whether or how far self-conscious-
ness is mediated by, and dependent on, our direct cognition of
the non-self or external universe.
Descartes, holding that the only immediate object of the
mind's awareness is itself, failed to explain satisfactorily the
possibility of our knowledge of spatial or material reality distinct
from the mind: and all subjective idealists we shall find to be
in the same condition. Kant made an attempt to prove, against
Descartes, that the possibility of empirical self-consciousness
presupposes and establishes "the existence of objects in space
outside" the mind.1 But his attempt was futile inasmuch as
he, too, had accepted the idealist presupposition,2 so that the
"outside" was for him on his own theory only a department of
mental, i.e. intramental, phenomena.
Had we no cognitive activities, and therefore no conscious
data, of the sentient order, it is impossible for us to form any
positive conception as to how self-consciousness would take
place, or what sort of self it would reveal: we have only a
negative and analogical knowledge of the modes of being and
knowing with which pure spirits or pure intelligences are
endowed.3 It is in the exercise of cognitive activities of the
sentient order that we do de facto become directly and concomi-
tantly aware of ourselves as conscious beings. Nor, indeed, does
it seem possible that our intellects, in the total absence of all
data of the sort we call sense-data from consciousness, could elicit
any act, or therefore become at all self-conscious. For in such
an hypothesis intellect would have no objects to apprehend, inas-
much as all the objects of its direct activity (including the con-
crete self or Ego) are given to it, and attainable by it, only in and
through the sentient mode of cognition which apprehends concrete,
1 Citique, pp. 799, 7°5 n. 2 Cf. § 97, p. 7, n. 4.
* According to scholastic teaching their knowledge of material things would be
got not by abstraction but by innate universal concepts. Cf. St. Thomas, De
Vtritaie, Q. viii., art. 9; Summa TheoL, I., Q. lv., art. 2.
.6
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
individual, actually existing sense-data.1 Of course by reflex
action it recognizes itself as immediately given in its direct
functions of conceiving and judging those data of sense; and it
does so directly and concomitantly even in these direct functions
themselves (95). But the possibility of these direct intellectual
processes is conditioned by the sense apprehension of concrete
data: Nihil est in intellectu quod non prius fuerit in sensu (71, 74,
77). So, too, therefore is self-consciousness.
This expression, "self-consciousness," is perhaps ambiguous. It usually
means the consciousness of self, revealed in psychological reflection or the
deliberate introspective contemplation of our direct mental activities (95).
But these activities themselves are conscious: and all consciousness is in a
certain sense consciousness of self, "con (cum)—scire": it is at least the
concomitant awareness of the self or subject together with awareness of an
object: not of course an awareness of the self as such, but an awareness
which reveals the self in the concrete as part of the whole conscious datum.
Reflex consciousness, then, in the sense of introspective contemplation, is not
the first or original revelation of the self; it rather recognizes as the self the
subject which is already revealed, but not recognized as the self, in the direct
conscious processes of perceiving, conceiving, judging, reasoning, etc
Now the functions of reasoning and judging are dependent on the
function of conceiving. And if we call all three functions by the common
name of "thinking" or "thought," then,—since we cannot consciously
"think" in vacuo? i.e., without thinking some object, and since we get the
original data or objects, on which to exercise the function of conscious thought,
only in and through sense perception,—it can and must be asserted that
even when the self is concomitantly revealed in our direct thought processes,
and recognized in them as the self by reflex intellectual introspection, it is so
revealed and recognized only dependently on sense perception, and not other-
wise ;—unless, indeed, it be maintained that we do somehow, by direct or
reflex intellectual consciousness, become aware of our intellectual acts (and
of the self, in and through them) apart from and independently of the objects
of these acts.
Does consciousness, therefore, reveal our direct cognitive acts apart from
their objects?
Direct concomitant consciousness certainly does not. This, however,
must be carefully noted, that in at least some of our processes of external
sense perception we become,—through the functioning of the organic, mus-
cular, or motor sense, or feeling of effort,—directly and concomitantly aware
of what we regard as the perceptive act itself (e.g. of seeing, hearing, touch-
1Cf. Geny, Unenouvelle theorie de perception (pp. 10 seq.,—apud Jeanniere,
op. cit., p. 377 n.): "No internal conception or perception can take place or have
meaning for us except dependently on an antecedent external perception; the
Cogito itself is no exception. I do not apprehend myself in vacuo, as it were, but
only as knowing an object and first of all an object which is not myself: the self
'ne se pose q'en s'opposant'."
a Cf. preceding note.
SELF-CONSCIOUSNESS AND MEMORY
ing, etc.), at the same time as we become aware of the object of the latter."
And by an effort of attention we may more or less distinctly segregate the
perceptive act, as an organic event or object, from the object which as a
perceptive act it reveals to us. But this sort of apprehension of our perceptive
act itself as an organic event or object, is distinct from the concomitant con-
crete consciousness or awareness of self which is an inseparable and essential
feature of that act as perceptive. For even if our acts of sense perception
did not thus reveal themselves to us, owing to their character as organic
functions of which we become aware through the internal organic and muscular
senses, they would still, as acts consciously perceptive of objects, make us con-
comitantly aware of themselves, or rather of ourselves, in the concrete: as
our direct intellectual acts must be held to do, though these are not organic;
for every cognitive act as such, must, being conscious, reveal subject, act, and
object together in the concrete.
Neither, therefore, can reflex consciousness, or reflection on the whole
direct cognitive process, reveal the direct cognitive act as cognitive or per-
ceptive (and with it the agent or subject), apart or in isolation from the ob-
ject of that act. But reflex consciousness or psychological reflection can of
course recognize, more or less in isolation, the organic process which was
revealed more or less in isolation by the internal organic and muscular sense,
as accompanying the perception (hearing, seeing, touching, etc.), of some ob-
ject. If, therefore, this concomitantly apprehended organic event be absent
from any cognitive act, as an index revealing the latter, then no conscious
awareness (whether direct or reflex) of such a cognitive act apart or in isola-
tion from its object, would seem to be possible. And even when the organic
event is present, and apprehended by the internal organic and muscular sense,
it is apprehended not as a cognitive act but as an organic event or object
merely ;2—nor can the act of the internal sense apprehending the organic event
reveal its own self (or its subject) apart or in isolation from this organic event
as object.
It is important to bear in mind that the concomitant (" direct") con-
sciousness which is an inseparable and essential feature of all cognitive
awareness of any datum whatsoever does not reveal the self as formally dis-
tinct from the non-self, or even the conscious subject as formally distinct from
the datum as object. Duality of subject and object is involved in all cogni-
tion, but it is only by intellect that the distinction is apprehended. So, too,
some data of our conscious cognition are marked by a peculiar feature which
intellect interprets as internalily or selfness, and others by an opposite feature
which intellect interprets as externality or non-selfness,2 but again it is in-
tellect that interprets this internal or external reference of consciously appre-
hended data as signifying that the former domain of data reveals the Ego or
self, and the latter domain the non-Ego or external universe. Psychologists,
moreover, prove that this explicit judgment, whereby the individual explicitly
1 In a similar way we become vaguely aware of the brain-effort, tension, fatigue,
etc., accompanying intense intellectual activity, owing to this latter being sustained
and subserved by the organic sense activity of the imagination.
•Having of course the characteristic of internality or selfness, but not yet
judged by intellect to belong to the self in distinction from the non-self.
* Cf. supra, § 97, p. 9, n. 2; infra, §§ 105, rog.
vol. 11. 2
18
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
discriminates his own self or Ego from the remainder of the total content of
his consciousness, comes comparatively late in the gradual development and
growth of his mental experience: that in infancy there is no conscious dis-
tinction of self from non-self: that the earlier cognitions and implicit judg-
ments of childhood rather tend to regard all their contents indiscriminately
as objective and external.1
1Cf. Maher, op. eit., pp. 361-7, 474-92; Jeanniere, op. cit., pp. 379-80;
infra, §§ 106, 107, 109, n6.
CHAPTER XIV.
extramental reality. the external universe.
ioi. Reality of the Cognitive Acts or States of the
"Ego," Compared with Reality of their Objects—We
have already adverted more than once to the fact that philo-
sophers generally appear to have experienced much more
serious difficulty in explaining how the conscious self or subject
can come to know any extra-subjective or mind-independent
reality, than in explaining how the subject can apprehend its
own reality as self or Ego} The possibility of knowing a real,
external, material, extended universe, distinct from the perceiving
mind, has now to be examined by investigating the significance
and validity of external sense perception.
We can, perhaps, best approach this subject by indicating
here one reason of the idealist tendency to regard the only direct
object of our knowledge as being something essentially mental,
—a reason bearing on the nature of the objects of reflex or
psychological introspection. These objects are our direct, con-
scious, cognitive acts. Now these acts are themselves realities:
they constitute a domain of reality which we discover by turning
our attention inwards from their objects to themselves. When
we thus make them objects of our reflex consideration we tend
to assimilate them to their own objects, i.e. to regard them as
realities (or objects of cognition) merely, and to forget that they
are realities of an altogether special kind, quite suigeneris, inas-
much as they are realities which, unlike other realities, are not
merely objects of cognition but are themselves cognitions of objects.
If, therefore, we think of our direct knowledge (or cognitive acts)
merely as a reality,—of the mental order of course, but yet as
something which merely is, rather than as something which not
merely is, but knows, or has itself an object,—we are tacitly ac-
cepting the implication that in this direct knowledge
1 Vol. i., §§ i7i 19. 35. 75- Cf. Prichard, op. cit., pp. 124-6.
19 2 *
20
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
"the world is not, at any rate directly, object of mind, for ex hypothesi a
reality which merely is and is not the knowledge of anything has no object.
Hence it comes to be thought that the only object or, at least the only direct
object of the mind is this mental reality itself, which is the object of reflection;
in other words, that the only immediate object of the mind comes to be
thought of as its own idea. The root of the mistake lies in the initial sup-
position—which, it may be noted, seems to underlie the whole treatment of
knowledge by empirical psychology—that knowledge can be treated as a
reality to be apprehended, in the way in which any reality which is not know-
ledge is a reality to be apprehended."1
Now, if the only direct object of the individual mind be as-
sumed to be the mind itself as revealed in its own conscious
states, and if some of these conscious states be regarded as
"ideas" or "representations" or "appearances" of an external,
material universe supposed to have a real being or existence be-
yond consciousness and independently of the Ego,—a universe
which men spontaneously believe themselves to be directly aware
of through their conscious acts of external sense perception,—the
problem at once arises: Can we know with reasoned certitude
that any such mind-independent reality exists, any reality whose
real existence or esse reale is really distinct from the conscious
states, or "ideas," "appearances," "representations," etc, of
which alone we are assumed to be directly aware, and whose
reality or esse reale is supposed to consist in their esse ideale, in
their being objects of awareness, in their "being actually per-
ceived," in their "percipt"? And if such reasoned certitude of
a mind-independent, external, material reality be possible, how
do we attain to it? This brings out the distinction between the
real being, which things are supposed to have in themselves in-
dependently of our knowledge or awareness of them, or "things-
as-they-are-in-themselves," or "things-in-themselves," on the one
hand, and "consciously apprehended being," or " the being things
have in and for cognition," or consciously apprehended "appear-
ances" or "phenomena," on the other hand. The distinction,
which will recur repeatedly, will be found to have originated for
each of us, and to be familiar to each of us, from the ordinarily
experienced facts of external sense perception; and in due course
we shall examine its significance.2 It seems to suggest that
while the reality of directly apprehended facts of consciousness
is beyond all possible dispute, being identical with the conscious
1 Prichard, op. at., p. 126.
a Cf. infra, chap. xx.
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY. EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 21
apprehension of them, the reality of anything beyond these is
problematical.1
102. Is the Reality ("Esse") of Conscious States
Identical with their Apprehension (" Percipi ") ?—We may
therefore ask what precisely is meant by the common assertion
made in regard to all conscious, cognitive states, or data, or acts,
—that their "esse est percipi" that their being or reality is identi-
cal with and consists in their being perceived.5 A conscious,
cognitive act is itself a reality. Now the assertion obviously
does not mean that this reality is identical with any second,
distinct, reflex cognitive act by which the reality of the first or
direct cognitive act may be apprehended in its concrete happen-
ing. What it does mean is that the directly conscious, cognitive
act itself is indeed a reality, but is also, as conscious or cognitive,
a reality that is suigeneris, a reality which differs from every other
reality in this that while every other reality is merely an object of
(possible or actual) cognition, this particular reality which is the
conscious, cognitive act, is what it is because it reveals an object
to a subject and thus eo ipso and simultaneously makes the subject
aware of object, act, and subject in the concrete; and that it would
cease to be what it is if it failed thus to reveal itself (as well as
its object) to the subject (or to be itself " perceived " or "known,"
"percipi" by the subject). In other words, it means that the
differentia specifica of the reality which is a conscious, cognitive
act as such,—that which marks it off from all other reality,—is
its being actually apprehended (not by another act but in and
through itself), so that it ceases not only to apprehend or reveal an
object, but ceases to be, when it ceases to be directly and con-
1" If we apprehended our states of consciousness in a representation, and not
intuitively and by identity, the question would be raised whether that representation
faithfully presented them, or falsified by disfiguring them. Hence we should have
to seek for a criterion whereby to determine which states of consciousness are as
they are represented (or appear), and which states are otherwise than they are re-
presented: in other words, we should need a Criteriology of conscious representa-
tions. But that is just what no one has ever yet felt any need of [Query—What of
Kant's doctrine of the 'phenomenal Ego1? Cf. infra, §§ 111, 129]. Our conscious
states are given by identity, without the intervention of any representation. They
are what they appear, because for them to be and to appear are one and the same
thing. In the domain of consciousness error is absolutely impossible [96]. And
this is the basis of all criteriological research, which takes as undisputed starting-
point the reality,—incontestable and uncontested,—of representative states of con-
sciousness."—Jeanniere, op. cit., p. 394 n. Cf., however, infra, chaps, xix., xx.
'" percipi " and " perceived" are understood in the wide sense of " cognosci,"
"being known,"—awareness of any sort.
22
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
comitantly apprehended. If other realities can be consciously ap-
prehended, they are supposed to have and retain their reality
independently of their being apprehended: they are supposed to
have an esse reale independently of the "percipi" esse cogniturn,
esse ideale, esse intentionale, involved in their becoming objects
of conscious cognition. But the reality or esse reale of the con-
scious, cognitive act, as such, essentially is or includes this percipi
or esse cognitum of the object (whatever this be, whether it be
matter, spirit, self, non-self, mental acts, forms of thought, etc.)
which this act reveals (together with itself) to consciousness.1
The whole direct conscious cognitive process may, no doubt,
be deliberately made the object of a reflex act of psychological
introspection, and may be analysed by acts of the intellect into
subject, act, and object; and in each of these reflex cognitions it
gets a new esse intentionale; but the direct act itself, in order to
be apprehended in this same act, does not need to get an esse
intentionale distinct from its own reality: in its own reality, in
its esse reale, it is present to the conscious subject.
But it is to be noted that all this is true of the actual existence
or happening of the conscious, cognitive act as cognitive or per-
ceptive of an object. Every such act, however, besides being es-
sentially conscious or cognitive of an object (under which aspect
its esse is percipi)] is in its real nature a vital act of a vital subject,
and its real nature as such must be discovered by intellectual
analysis of the whole cognitive process. Now if it be an act of
sense perception its happening as an organic event or fact may be
revealed as such to consciousness through the internal, organic
and muscular sense (100); and as such it is seen to have an
"esse" or reality which does not appear identical with its
"percipi" any more than the "esse" of any other non-cognitive
reality, such as a mountain, appears identical with its "percipi".
Attention to this fact would obviate much confusion and explain
much apparent contradiction between statements made by dif-
ferent writers in regard to acts of sense perception.
I consciously judge, for instance, that " two and two are four " . To say
that the esse of that act is its percipi means simply that I could not judge
1 Hence a cognitive act, as conscious, and as concomitant object of the mind's
awareness, does not need, for such awareness, any esse intentionale distinct from its
esse reale, to make it present to the mind, whereas every other supposed reality,
other than a conscious act (which thus concomitantly reveals itself and its subject
or agent in the concrete), does need, in order to become an object of awareness, an
esse intentionale distinct from its esse reale.
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY. EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 23
"two and two " to be "four," I could not apprehend the objective relation
between subject and predicate, unless in and by the act of apprehending I were
made conscious of the presence of that objective relation to my mind and of
myself apprehending it present. It does not mean that the act of judgment
is the mere present and apprehended relation, or even the mere presence of
the relation,—though without the relation, and its presence, the act of appre-
hension could not take place,—but that it is an act which essentially and by
its nature gives the objective relation its mental presence, and would not be
such if it did not give the object this presence and make me aware of myself
apprehending the object.1
Again, "I see the paper on which I am writing ". To say that the esse
of the seeing is its percipi means that unless by the act of seeing the paper
I were aware of seeing it, the seeing would not take place at all: I could not
see the paper without being aware of seeing it: by the act of seeing I am
concomitantly aware of myself seeing; though by the mere act of seeing I
am, of course, not aware of the self and the seeing as distinct from the paper,
but of all together as one whole. Here, however, I may be simultaneously
aware of an additional datum, viz. the muscular strain or tension involved in
the organic activity of the sense organs, the eyes (100). And if I am, then in
addition to my consciousness of seeing as an act perceptive of an object,
I am simultaneously aware (through the internal, muscular sense) of seeing
as an organic act or event (and concomitantly aware of this latter aware-
ness).
Finally let us take this example, "I feel a toothache ". Now a tooth-
ache is a conscious state. Did we not feel it, were we not aware of it,
it would not be really there at all. There may be unconscious mental states,
—we may leave that to psychologists ;—and there certainly are unconscious
organic states,—that is, assuming matter to be a mind-independent reality;
—but a toothache, if and while it is an ache, is something of which ne-
cessarily we are aware or conscious. As a sentient conscious state or
process by which we are aware of something its esse is percipi. That is,
we could not feel or perceive the something without being aware of feeling
or perceiving it. Feeling the ache is being aware of feeling it.3 We
could not feel without being aware of feeling. But if the esse of a toothache
is thus its percipi, can it nevertheless be true to say, as Prichard says,'
"It must in the end be conceded of a toothache as much as of a stone that
1 The act of intellectually apprehending the objective relation, if considered in
the abstract, apart from the latter, and from the presence of the latter to the intellect,
is nothing that we can become aware of: it is of the concrete act whereby the rela-
tion is rendered present to, and apprehended by, the subject, that we assert that itt
eue is percipi, in the sense that concomitant consciousness of itself (and its subject)
in the concrete is an essential feature of its reality, though not in the sense of deny-
ing this "esse percipi" to be a real vital process whose nature can be explored by
reflection.
* If the " aching " or " painful condition " is itself described as a " feeling " we
are using this latter term in its objective sense as the object of the conscious act by
which we feel or become aware. Cf. "I feel (or am aware of) a feeling (or
apprehended state or condition) ".
2Of. cit., p. 118.
?4
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
it exists independently of the knowledge of it "? That it exists independ-
ently of our reflecting on it, thinking (judging, reasoning, etc.) about it
(and "knowing " it in that sense), yes: the reality of my toothache does not
depend on what I think or judge it to be, any more than in the case of
the stone. That the toothache exists independently of my feeling or being
aware of it (and "knowing " it in that wide sense of the term), no : the stone
is a reality which I can conceive to exist without my being aware of it; but
the aching is a conscious process of an organic sense, a process which is
indeed a reality but a reality to which my awareness of it is essential. In
that it differs from the stone. Yet even in regard to mere awareness, is there
not a sense in which a toothache is as independent of this latter as a stone?
Yes, if I use the term "toothache " not in its meaning as a conscious state or
feeling, but in its meaning as a diseased physical or organic condition.
The toothache in this latter sense is just as independent of my feeling
or awareness as is the tooth itself, or as a stone: the stone, the tooth, and
the physical condition of the tooth, we can and do conceive as having each
alike a reality which is independent of our awareness of them: whether we
are right in thinking them to have such a mind-independent reality being the
main question of the significance and validity of sense perception.
All conscious states, processes and activities,—realities of the kind
called "mental,"—are at all events realities of whose actual existence or
happening the Ego is directly and immediately aware. But they belong
essentially to the reality of the Ego: whether all or any of them bring the
Ego into cognitive relation with any reality beyond and distinct from the
Ego is the main point now at issue.
103. Alternative Methods of Justifying Spontaneous
Belief in the Existence of an External Material
Universe. (A) Transition Effected by Appeal to the
Principle of Causality.—The question how we pass from
a reasoned intellectual conviction of the real existence of the
Ego (which has been already vindicated against Kant1) to a
similar conviction concerning the existence of a material
universe really distinct from and independent of the Ego (or
of a material universe including the individual perceiver's own
body, distinct from and independent of the latter's own mind),
and the question whether the latter conviction (which exists
in all men spontaneously) can be rationally justified, and, if so,
how?—is it by reasoning from the implications of the former
conviction ? or by showing that the real existence of an external
material universe is as immediately evident to the knowing
subject (in and through external sense perception) as his own
real existence is evident to him in and through all his conscious
processes ?—these are questions which can be answered only by
1 Cf. vol. i„ §§ 77, 89; supra, §§ 97, 99, 100.
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY. EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 25
the closest scrutiny of our cognitive processes, both intellectual
and sentient, of their respective data, and of the implications of
these data.
Nor do those who defend as rationally justifiable men's
spontaneous conviction that they have knowledge of the exist-
ence and nature of a material universe really distinct from and
independent of their own minds, justify this conviction on the
same lines. For some of them, holding that the really existing
Ego is not merely the first but the only reality directly and
immediately apprehended and known by the individual mind
as real, and convinced that the immediate data of external
sense perception, the data characterized by "extensity" and
"externality," can be themselves only intramental states of
the Ego,—justify our belief in the mind-independent existence
and reality of an external material universe by interpreting
those data of external sense perception as representing, and
essentially involving the existence of, such a universe beyond and
distinct from the Ego. In their view the transition from know-
ledge of the real Ego to knowledge of the universe as a reality
other than and distinct from the Ego, while grounded in external
sense perception, is effected and justified only by thought. They
effect the transition by the following line of argument:—
It is by intellect, by thought, that we apprehend, in and through the
data of consciousness, the self as really existing, and judge the self to be an
existing reality. It is through and from these data (all of which are within
the domain of the Ego) that we form the concepts of substance and accident,
subject and states, permanence and change, agent and action, cause and
effect, unity and plurality, identity and distinction, the possible and the actual,
essence and existence, being and knowing, etc., and find the objects of these
concepts verified in the Ego. Reflecting on the judgments we form by means
of these and other derivative concepts, we find that these judgments are
objectively grounded (chap, viii.) in the nature of the conceived objects, and
that the conceived objects themselves represent what is given (chap, ix.) in
the concrete, individual data of consciousness. In the concrete Ego, there-
fore, including its whole conscious content, our thought apprehends the exist-
ence, and in some measure the nature, of reality. Among the intuitions
it has of the nature of reality are the principles of identity, contradiction,
sufficient reason, causality, etc. The first three of those enumerated, the Ego
sees to be of necessary and universal application to whatever really is,
the fourth to whatever really becomes or happens (64, 66, 93). Reflecting, in
the light of this latter principle, on the conscious data of external sense
perception,—data which men spontaneously judge to be external to, and
other than, and independent of, the perceiving Ego (because of their peculiar
feature of "externality"), but which cannot themselves be really anything
2 6
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
other than the Ego variously affected,—we rationally infer, by the principle
of causality, that those data, so characterized by the feature of "external
reference," must have an adequate cause ; that this adequate cause cannot be
the Ego; that they are therefore partially caused by an extramental reality
beyond the Ego, viz. the material universe represented by those data of
external sense perception or sense consciousness.
It is obvious, these philosophers point out, that if there be a reality beyond
and distinct from the Ego, this reality, in order to be known, must be some-
how really related to the Ego, must be cognitively identified with the Ego,
must be somehow (" intentionaliter") reproduced in the Ego} This union
is originated in sense perception or sense consciousness. But the objects
given in external sense perception, its data, are not identically the reality or
realities beyond the Ego, but are only products of the former in the latter,
products which are likewise representations or appearances of the former in
the latter. So that, although we may be said, by and in sense perception,
virtually to effect the transition from Ego to non-Ego by becoming aware of
appearances of the latter in the Ego, and by means of this awareness perceiv-
ing (though not directly and immediately apprehending) the non-Ego (for to
"perceive "—"per-capere "—is to apprehend something through, or by means
of, something else) ; nevertheless, since perception merely makes us aware of
an appearing datum, and does not interpret its nature, or judge of its origin,
or distinguish Ego from non-Ego, it is thought alone,—judging, interpreting,
reasoning on and from those data,—that formally and by deliberate reflection
effects the transition from knowledge of the Ego to knowledge of a real non-
Ego or external universe. And while thus justifying, through the aid of the
rational principle of causality, our spontaneous conviction that we have
genuine knowledge of the existence and nature of a real, material universe
beyond consciousness and distinct from the Ego, our reason at the same time
corrects the erroneous spontaneous conviction of what is called "naif" real-
ism, the conviction, namely, that external sense perception reveals directly
and immediately to the Ego what sort that material universe is in itself, in-
stead of merely revealing, as it merely does, the various representations or
appearances produced by that material universe in the consciousness of the
Ego.
104. Criticism of First Alternative.—Now it might, perhaps, be
objected to this line of argument that it scarcely achieves its purpose. Our
abstract concept of cause has been shown to be derived by intellect from the
individual data of consciousness (65, 75-6, 92-3). The object of this concept
has been shown to be really embodied in these data, and it is therefore validly
applicable to them. These data, however, even those of them characterized
by "extensity" and "externality," belong—in the view we are examining—
exclusively to the domain of the real Ego. It would appear, therefore, that
the concept of cause has objective reality, no doubt, and is validly applicable
to all the realities revealed at any time within the domain of consciousness, />.
1 This is a fundamental principle of the Aristotelian and scholastic theory of
knowledge. "Cognitum est in cognoscente." "Amina cognosccndo quodammodo
Jit omnia": "quodammodo," i.e. intetttionaliter or representatively. By knowledge
the Ego is a microcosm, a conscious assimilation or apprehension or mirroring of
the cosmos or macrocosm.
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY.
EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 27
within the domain of the real Ego; but since ex hypothesi it does not yet
appear from inspection of the data of consciousness that there is any reality
beyond the domain of the real Ego, it is not clear how the principle of causality
can attain to any such reality for us.
Of course it will be pointed out that our intellect, once it has abstracted
from the data of consciousness the concept of "something happening," and
grasps what this necessarily involves, viz. "having a cause," sees immediately
and intuitively the necessary and universal applicability of this principle to all
contingent reality as such. Granted; but at this stage the mind has, ex
hypotkesi, no knowledge of any reality beyond the Ego: since ex hypothesi
the conscious data characterized by a feeling or sentiment of " otherness " or
"externality" are only modes of the real Ego; and the plain man's spon-
taneous interpretation of them as being really other than his Ego, or as
directly and immediately revealing to him a reality other than his Ego, is not
at this stage rationally justified,1 and therefore is not knowledge of a real
non-Ego.
But, it will be promptly urged, we can see by introspection that the
whole internal panorama of ever changing, ever appearing and disappearing
data, which fill up the conscious domain of the Ego, cannot be adequately
accounted for by the reality which is the Ego, so that we are forced to infer,
by the principle of causality, the existence of a reality beyond, and distinct
from, and other than, the Ego. This seems unanswerable. But let us see.
The panorama referred to certainly cannot be adequately accounted for by
the real Ego so far as this real Ego is revealed in consciousness, by the
real Ego as consciously apprehended, or—to put it yet another way—by the
portion (of the real Ego) revealed in consciousness. But since, on the
hypothesis under examination, we have at this stage neither knowledge nor
even sense-awareness of any other reality3 than the Ego, so far from being
forced to infer, as a necessary factor in the adequate cause of our conscious
states, a reality other than the Ego, we are actually debarred from making
this inference, and are forced rather to infer that since the consciously appre-
hended portion of the Ego is not the adequate cause of our conscious states,
these must be partially caused by the Ego acting unconsciously and in a
manner unknown to us.
And why are we, on the theory, debarred from inferring a reality other
than the Ego? Because although the data of our consciousness have
1 Nay, the spontaneous interpretation of these data characterized by " otherness"
or "externality," as being identically the real non-Ego or material universe (thus
thought to be immediately and directly given to the Ego in external sense percep-
tion), is regarded as an erroneous conviction by those who reject the theory of im-
mediate sense perception in every form.
* It is admitted on the theory that we have sense awareness of conscious data
characterized by the feeling of " externality " or " otherness "; of what we therefore
call " appearances" or *' representations ". But it is held that these are modes of the
Eg0, that sense awareness does not extend beyond them, and that the judgment
whereby (without invoking the principle of causality or having recourse to inference
from effect to cause) we spontaneously interpret them as revealing to the Ego a
reality other than the Ego, does not of itself give us direct and self-evidently justified
intellectual knowledge of the existence of a reality other than and distinct from the
Ego.
28
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
furnished us with abstract concepts of unity and plurality, permanence and
change, identity and distinction or otherness, etc., and although these con-
cepts are therefore validly applicable to the real Ego in its conscious states,
at the same time if the conscious data from which they are derived are all
modes of the Ego, it is impossible to see how the concept of real otherness
in the sense of distinction from the Ego1 can be obtained from such data;
and yet, unless we already have such a concept (i.e. of real otherness or dis-
tinction from the Ego, or, of real non-selfness), and know it to be objectively
and really valid, it is obvious that the principle of causality cannot avail us
to infer a cause really other than the self.
It may be urged against this that the concept of real distinction or
real otherness, which we undoubtedly derive by abstraction from the real
diversity and real changes in the conscious states of the real Ego, is seen to
be applicable to all reality, and therefore to the relation between "the real
Ego of which we are conscious," as one term, and "some reality other than
this," as the other term. We reply that this is so, provided we already have
this latter concept—of "some reality other than the self,"—and know this
concept to be objectively and really valid. But on the theory we are examin-
ing it seems impossible not merely to know this concept to be valid, but
even to have it at all. And why? Because on this theory the only concept
of distinction or otherness which we can derive from the data of our direct
consciousness or awareness is the concept of distinction or otherness among
the data, and within the domain, of the real Ego. For on this theory the
sense-feeling of "externality " or "otherness "or "non-selfness," attaching to
some of those data, does not enable us to judge, or justify us in interpreting
intellectually, those data to be really other than the self. How could we,
therefore, on this theory, ever obtain or form the conscious intellectual con-
cept of the non-Ego at all,—seeing that the theory denies that there is
among the data of our direct consciousness or awareness any counterpart or
foundation for it? In other words, unless reality other than the self is im-
mediately given to the self among the data, and in the states, of the latter's
direct consciousness or awareness, it seems impossible for us to attain intel-
lectually,—by any reflex thought processes of interpreting and reasoning
from such data,—to reality other than the self. For the concept really
requisite for such a transition, viz. the objectively and really valid concept
of " non-self reality " would not be in our possession.
If, finally, those who think that the reality of the non-Ego or material
universe is not immediately revealed in direct external sense awareness, but
only a "product," an "appearance," a "representation" of this universe,—
a conscious datum which, though characterized by its feeling of externality, is
yet a mode or state of the real Ego,—if such philosophers say that in this
same sense-feeling of externality attaching to such data we have the veritable
and sufficient sense-counterpart and foundation whence to derive by in-
tellectual abstraction the concept of " reality other than the Ego,"—then they
account, indeed, for the existence of this intellectual concept and for our con-
scious possession of it, but how do they vindicate its objective and real validity?
1 And not merely in the sense of distinction or otherness of on* conscious datum
from another within the Ego.
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY. EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 29
If the sense-feeling of " externality" (and "extensity") attaching to certain
conscious data of external sense perception cannot be itself interpreted by in-
tellect as manifesting those data to be themselves direct and immediate re-
velations to the Ego, of a real non-Ego, or a reality other than the Ego,—if,
in other words, notwithstanding this remarkable characteristic of such data,
we must on reflection intellectually pronounce such data to be in themselves
and in their reality only modes of the real Ego,—then does it not follow that
the abstract intellectual concept of "reality other than the Ego,"—grounded
as it is on a feeling which is after all subjective and not significant (to in-
tellect) ofreal externality or real non-selfness,—cannot be itself objectively and
really valid? If the concept be derived from data which, whatever be their
external reference, are really modes of the Ego,—or rather from a sense
feature of these data which has itself for intellect no significance of external
or non-self reality, how can that concept itself enable thought to attain to an
external reality,—seeing that the content or object of the concept is merely
the intellectual abstract of the concrete " sense-feeling of externality," a con-
tent which we might describe as "external appearance," or "apparent ex-
ternality," or "ultra-conscious reference of the Ego-Tea.\hy "? Or how can
recourse to the principle of causality serve to give the concept, as its content
or object, that which we are looking for, namely, "external or non-self
reality"! For this principle, as we saw, can itself merely assure us that the
total conscious content of the Ego is not self-explaining. It is at this point
precisely that the collateral concept of distinction or otherness must come in
to give definite, positive content to the causal or explaining factor to which the
principle of causality refers us.1 It is not the principle of causality that gives
'Hence the importance of investigating carefully the origin and grounds of our
concept of the absolute or major real distinction, understood as the distinction be-
tween one really existing being and another, and the tests for the objectively and
really valid application of this concept. The whole question is discussed in our
Ontology, §§ 23, 35-9. Cf. especially, § 38, p. 148, where it is pointed out that the
relation of efficient causality is not of itself sufficient to establish between the terms
of the relation (cause and effect) a teal distinction in the sense of a distinction be-
tween one existing being (the Ego, for instance) and any second really existing be-
ing (e.g. the non-Ego). Of course the relation of efficient causality is sufficient to
justify our concept of a real distinction in the sense of a distinction between real
states (especially successive states) in the really changing contents of the Ego as a
self-conscious reality. But if we reflect, in the light of the principle of causality,
on the fact that we find in our consciousness states or data which, although they are
contingent and therefore caused, we nevertheless do not know to be caused by the
self so far as we are conscious of the latter, this reflection alone cannot possibly re-
veal to thought a reality other than the self: it merely identifies the cause (referred
to by the principle) with this reality, provided toe have already what we know to be
an objective and really valid concept of non-self reality. - The question then is, can
thought (meaning intellectual abstraction, generalization, conception, judgment, and
reasoning) reach a non-self reality if no such reality be directly and immediately
given to the Ego in any of its mental processes of direct conscious cognition or
awareness? It does not seem possible. We know it is contended by some that
even though direct sense awareness reveals merely the Ego,—variously impressed or
affected by conscious states, some of which have an appearance of, or reference to,
externality or non-selfness,—nevertheless thought can validly conceive and attain to
non-self reality. But it cannot do so, as we have seen, by the principle of causality,
3°
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
a positive content to the concept of otherness-from-the-self. The objective
and real validity of this concept must stand or fall on its own merits. If the
direct conscious data on which it is based, and from which it is derived, reveal
only the Ego, it is objectively and really valid only in its application to these
conscious data within the real Ego. If it is based on, and derived from the
direct sense-feeling of externality in certain of those data, then (1) if this feel-
ing of externality has no significance of real externality for intellect, this con-
cept of otherness, together with the principle of causality, can refer us only to
an ultra-conscious domain of the real Ego, but not to a reality other than the
Ego; while (2) if this sense-feeling of externality reveals the data char-
acterized by it as really other than, though directly and immediately mani-
fested to, the real Ego, and if intellect can and does interpret as really valid
the external significance of this consciously apprehended characteristic of the
data of our external sense awareness or sense perception, then indeed the ab-
stract intellectual concept of otherness, in the requisite sense of "otherness-
from-the-self" is itself objectively and really valid,—and gives definite and
positive content to the ultra-conscious causal factor to which the principle of
causality refers us. But in this case we do not really need the principle of
causality to give us reasoned intellectual certitude of the existence of a real
world distinct from the Ego. For by virtue of the objective and real validity
of the concept of "reality-other-than-the-^ff,"—a validity which it derives
from the conscious data of our external sense awareness, from the fact that
a non-self reality is directly given to the Ego in these data, as evidenced by
their characteristic of " externality,"—we already possess reasoned intellectual
certitude for the judgment, "That which I apprehend in external sense per-
ception, and the nature of which I interpret intellectually by judgment and
inference, I know to be a real universe really existing distinct from, and inde-
pendently of, myself the perceiver and knower ".
unless it has already the valid concept of such reality. And how the concept can
be valid if the feeling of externality or non-selfness in the conscious data of external
perception,—the feeling from which alone such a concept can be derived,—cannot
be itself intellectually interpreted as a direct manifestation of a real non-Ego to the
real Ego,—how in such an hypothesis the concept can be regarded as really valid,
we fail to see.
In the context referred to (ibid., § 37, p. 147; p. 146 n.; pp. 151-3), the conclu-
sion is reached that abstract thought alone cannot attain to, or identify, the distinc-
tion which is the most real of all distinctions, vis. that between one individual
existing real being and another: of which distinction the most profoundly important
instance is the distinction between the real Ego and reality other than the Ego. It
is shown there that for the vindication of the objective and real validity of this dis-
tinction abstract thought must appeal to direct conscious awareness of reality in the
concrete. But if in the domain of the mind's direct and intuitive awareness (whether
sentient or intellectual) of reality, there is given only the self-reality, it is not easy
to see how intellectual reflection (through abstract concepts) can ever effect a valid
transition from such real sf//-data to a non-self-reality (and not merely to an un-
conscious or subconscious or ultra-conscious domain of the Ego, as the intellectual
analogue of the " externality "—and " extensity "—of certain of these conscious self-
data).
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY. EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 31
105. (2?) Spontaneous Conviction of the Existence
of an External Material Universe Rationally Justi-
fied by Intellectual Reflection on the Nature and
Characteristics of External Sense Data.—This brings
us to the second of the above-mentioned (103) alternative
methods of vindicating a reasoned certitude for men's spontane-
ous conviction that they can and do know the existence, and
something of the nature, of a real material universe independent
of their own minds. According to this view a real external uni-
verse, a reality other than the Ego, is given or presented to the
latter in the data which we are made directly aware of in external
sense perception. The Ego has from the beginning conscious
data characterized by the feelings of what we intellectually con-
ceive and describe as "voluminousness" or "extensity," and
"externality". The data so characterized are the foundation
and source of our abstract concepts of "extension," "impene-
trability," "matter" or "body," "non-self,"1—concepts which
we compare and contrast with the concepts of "conscious appre-
hension," "conscious unity of the manifold," "conscious being,"
"mind," "self" or "Ego" concepts simultaneously formed by
intellectual activity, direct and reflex, from all the data of our
direct awareness. Now we spontaneously judge or interpret the
data which furnish us with the former set of concepts,—especially
the data accompanied and marked by the feeling of "exter-
nality "s—to be a reality other than the perceiving and thinking
self. And reflecting on this spontaneous judgment, and on the
concepts whereby we formed it, we can and do see the judgment
to be true and the concepts to be objectively and really valid.
That is to say, external sense perception, by revealing to us
"external" data, reveals to us what we, by interpreting them,
rightly judge to be a reality other than the self. In other words,"
the characteristics of extensity and externality, in certain con-
scious data, which made these latter appear as external to the
1 The concept of " object-of-awareness " is also derived de facto from such data,
though it can be derived even from the most purely subjective data of conscious-
ness: for intellect sees involved in all possible awareness duality of "conscious /
subject" and " apprehended object ".
* The feelings of " extensity " and " voluminousness," which yield the concepts
of "extended or spatial reality," " matter " or "body," we do not at first, but only
later, detect as characterizing some data which do not appear as " external " but as
"internal" or "self" data; and thus we come to realize that the "self" is not
merely a "thinking subject," but likewise "a sense-perceiving subject," and is as
such corporeal as well as conscious or mental. Cf. infra, § 116.
3~
THEOR Y OF KNOIVLEDGE
Ego when directly aware of them, are now regarded, and rightly
regarded, by intellect reflecting on them, as furnishing to intellect
direct and immediate evidence, objective and real evidence, for
the reasoned judgment that "those data are really an actually
existing material universe distinct from the reality of the self or
Ego".
According to this view of the matter, therefore, the real non-Ego is just
as directly and immediately given in cognition as the Ego (100). It is given
in our direct conscious awareness of data marked by "extensity" and "ex-
ternality ". In our spontaneous interpretations of these data of external sense
perception it is cognized as really other than the Ego. And rational re/lec-
tion on the direct data from which we form the concept of a "real non-Ego"
justifies the objective validity of this concept, and the truth of the judgment
wherein we predicate it of these data.
It is true, indeed, that the reality of the Ego is the reality about whose
actual existence reflection shows our spontaneous conviction to be most un-
shakeable (31, 35). But do I know my "self" or Ego as a permanent
being, abiding self-identical amid change of conscious states,—as a being
which persists in existence independently of my awareness of it, and whose
"esse" is not mere "percipi,"—have I this sort of knowledge of the Ego
antecedently to, and as a prerequisite condition for, my reasoned conviction 1
that there also exists, besides myself, a real non-Ego which is also a being
or domain of being that persists independently of my awareness of it?
The former conviction is not a prerequisite of the latter. For the very con-
cepts, by the application of which to some of the conscious data of the
Ego as a self-conscious subject, I reach the former conviction,—viz. the
concepts of "actually existing being" (objective to a subject aware of it,
and involved in this awareness), "substance," "states," "change," "per-
manence" or "duration," "identity," etc.,—these very same concepts I
simultaneously and independently apply to other of these data (those affected
by "externality "), and I do so with a consciousness that the application is
valid; and I thus reach the latter conviction (viz. that there is a real non-Ego,
which also permanently persists throughout change and independently of my
awareness of it) concomitantly with my reaching the former.
I see, of course, that this real non-Ego must be cognitively related to my
real self, must be " made one " with me "cognitively " or "inlentionaliter,"
in order that I become aware of it or know it at all, and that this holds good
even for my direct sentient awareness, no less than for my thought and re-
flection. But just as I do not see that a real identity of that which I know
or become aware of, with myself knowing or aware of it, is essential to my
knowing or being aware of it, or how such supposition can in the least help
1 It is obvious that such a knowledge of the self is not a prerequisite condition
for (a) my awareness of " externality," or awareness of a distinction between con-
scious data of external perception (" strong " or " vivid" data) and conscious data of
imagination, conception, etc. (" weak " or "dim " data); or (6) for my spontaneous
intellectual conviction or judgment that the data which thus appear as external are
really external to myself who am aware of them.
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY. EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 33
me to realize how I even know or become aware of my self (17, 19, 35, 75,
101); so, too, I do not see how I can attain to a reasoned conviction of the
separate existence of the real non-Ego by thought, i.e. by way of inferring1
such existence from my own self-known real existence, or even by the use of con-
cepts in judgment to interpret certain data as revealing a real non-Ego, unless
these concepts are really and validly applicable to these data, and are already
known by me to be thus applicable: but they cannot be, and be known to be,
thus applicable, unless the concrete data of my direct sentient awareness—
the data from which the concepts are derived—reveal to me, and put me into
direct and immediate cognitive relation with, a real non-Ego (and not merely
with an "externally appearing" phase or aspect of the reality which is my
self). The fact is, therefore, that a real non-Ego is revealed to me in the
data of my direct external sense awareness or perception, and because it iz,
the concepts which I use in judging spontaneously that they reveal a really
existing non-Ego or external universe are objectively and really valid ; and
because reflection shows the fact and the reason of their validity, our spon-
taneous conviction of the actual existence of an external material universe
independent of conscious perception, and distinct from the Ego, is eo ipso
transformed into a reasoned philosophical certitude.
Not only, therefore, does it appear superfluous to appeal to the principle
of causality as a means of vindicating philosophical certitude for the spon-
taneous conviction that the perceived external material universe exists in-
dependently of our perception and thought; but such an appeal would even
appear to be futile in the very hypothesis in which it is deemed essential, and
to be useful—as a corroborative vindication—only in the hypothesis in which
it iz not really essential, for this purpose. For if we hold that the Ego
can and does directly apprehend a real non-Ego in the data of external sense
perception, and that therefore the concepts whereby we spontaneously judge
these data to be a real non-Ego are validly applied, then by mere reflection
on these percepts, concepts, and judgments, and without any appeal to the
principle of causality, we have transformed our spontaneous conviction into a
reflex certitude.3 While if we hold that the Ego can directly and im-
mediately apprehend, in and through the concrete data of its direct sense
consciousness or awareness, only itself (however variously impressed or
affected), how can thought, by means of concepts derived from such data,
interpret these or any of them to be a real non-Ego, or infer that any of them
involve real otherness or a real non-Ego?
'At the same time it is conceivable that reflection on the difficulties which
may be urged against the possibility of a direct sense awareness of anything
really other than states of the conscious Ego would destroy a person's spon-
tanoeus belief that he has in fact such a direct sense awareness of a real non-
self world or universe. And such a person might nevertheless not only
rationally justify his conviction that he knows his own self as a real existence;
but also convince himself that the concepts abstracted by his thought activity
1 By the principle of causality.
2Of course the argument from causality will then confirm this certitude (m) by
making us realize that without the already discovered real non-Ego as partial cause
of our conscious cognitive states, the succession of these in the Ego would be in-
explicable and unintelligible.
VOL. II. 3
34
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
from the concrete data of his direct awareness, and the necessary principles
apprehended by thought in the domain of such concepts, are objectively and
universally valid in their application to all reality, whether in the domain of
thought or of sense. The exercise of thought (thus admittedly valid) in in-
ferring the actual existence and nature of a real non-Ego by virtue of the
principle of causality, might then effect for such a person the transcending of
the self, or the transition to a real non-Ego, even though he had persuaded
himself that such transcendence or transition was a feat that lay beyond the
power of the mind's direct " external " sense awareness.1
r\ut it is not likely that many of those who deny that there is any rational
justification in the conscious data of external sense perception for the spon-
taneous judgment that "a reality other than the self exists," will admit that the
argument from causality rationally justifies this judgment (vol. i., p. 134).
Moreover, the inference from the real Ego to a real non-Ego by way of
the principle of causality, seems to us to labour under the drawback already
indicated : 2 that the principle of causality obliges us to infer merely that there
is and must be an adequate cause of our conscious states, that if the Ego as
consciously apprehended is not adequate cause of them there must be some
partial real cause of them beyond consciousness; but it does not assure us that
this something beyond consciousness is a reality other than the permanently
subsisting real Ego itself. In other words, the argument does not seem
effectively to exclude monism of some form or other. The falsity of monism
can be effectively established only by vindicating the validity of the major
real distinction in its application to the objects of our concepts of the real
Ego and the real non-Ego? Of course our concept of " real distinction " or
"real otherness," applied to the non-Ego as compared with the Ego, will be
shown to be valid if we can show that it has a real foundation in the concrete
data from which we abstract the concepts of "self," "non-self," and "other-
ness" or "distinction," in the domain of our direct consciousness or aware-
ness. Now if we divide this latter domain into immediate data of intellectual
thought (" intellectual " consciousness) and immediate data of sense awareness
(" sense " consciousness), and hold that intellect or thought proper (as well as
sense) has direct intuitions of individual concrete existences or happenings, it
will not be contended that any of these intuitions reveal, or furnish data for
the abstract concept of, a real non-Ego. For such intellectual intuitions are
generally understood to apprehend exclusively the Ego consciously think-
ing, conceiving, judging, reasoning, willing, etc. ;—the view of William of
Occam, that intellect has direct and immediate intuition of external or non-
self reality (82), being regarded as singular and erroneous. The concepts
abstracted from such intuitions, therefore, cannot reveal a real non-Ego to us,
for although they are of course indirectly applicable to all the conscious data
we can think of (even those characterized by " externality "), by being directly
applicable to our processes of thinking of these latter, nevertheless, since our
consciousness of this "externality" is ex hypothesi not recognized to be a
valid cognition or awareness of an external or non-self reality, the application
of such concepts to "external seeming" data of consciousness cannot trans -
1 Cf. jEAnnifcRK, op. cit., p. 224 n. *Supra, § 104.
• Ibid., p. 29, n. 1.
EXTRAMENTAL REALITY. EXTERNAL UNIVERSE 35
form these latter into a non-self reality. Moreover, as was pointed out above
(100) the intuitions and concepts of this intellectual or thought-domain of
consciousness are dependent for their existence or occurrence on the direct
conscious activities whereby we become aware of what are known as concrete
sense data: nihil est in intellect!/ quod prius non fuerit in sensu: the
original data of all cognitive activity are given in direct sense awareness.
In these latter, therefore, we must finally seek a valid foundation for our
abstract concepts of a "real non-Ego" and "real otherness or distinction
from the Ego". Now, if reflection were to pronounce these sense data,
including their felt characteristic of "externality" to be really modes or
phases or manifestations of the reality of the Ego, how would the abstract
concepts (of "extension," "matter," "otherness" or "distinction," etc.)
abstracted from such data by conception and validly applied to them again in
judgment, transcend the real Ego in such application? They could not
transcend it. Or if we applied such concepts in such a way as to make them
transcend the real Ego, i.e. by assuming them to reveal to us a real non-Ego,
would such application be really valid? It would not; for such concepts
would, ex hypothesi, not have been derived from any real non-self data;
they would have had, ex hypothesi, no foundation in any real non-self data;
since the seeming or felt "externality" of sense data would have been, ex
hypothesi, not an evidence of real externality or non-selfness, but only after
all a peculiar and unexplained feature of certain conscious states of the Ego
itself.
Of course, if our intellectual concepts were innate, i.e. obtained by us
independently of sense data and sense activities, and if in addition it could be
proved that intellectual cognition revealed to us, through such concepts, and
therefore also independently of sense, a domain of real being that would be
"objective" not merely in the sense in which every cognition as an act of
awareness has an "object," but in the sense of "non-self" or "really distinct
from and other than the knowing subject," then indeed it could be intelligibly
maintained that even though sense did not attain in perception to the real
non-self, but only to a consciously apprehended mode of the self, nevertheless
intellect could attain to the real non-self (namely, by the concept of "cause"
and the principle of causality) and could prove the "consciously apprehended
mode of the self," present in perception, to be at once a product and a repre-
sentation of the non-self in the perceiving and knowing subject.1 But our
concepts are not innate; they are not formed independently of sense-data;
our vindication of their real validity (i.e. of Moderate Realism, cf. 76-8) has con-
sisted in showing that the objects or contents revealed by them in the abstract
to consciousness are the identical objects or contents revealed to conscious-
ness in the concrete in our acts of internal and external sense perception—on
the assumption, which we then promised (72) to prove at a later stage, that
these latter objects or contents are realities. Now the concept of real
externality or real-otherness-from-the-self is a concept of supreme importance
in its bearing on the problem of the knowing subject's capability of trans-
cending self in the process of cognition; and upon the validity of its appli-
1 Cf. Prichard's analogous view that our intellectual knowledge of space and
spatial relations is independent of sense perception,—infra, %% 125, 128.
3*
36
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
cation to the whole domain of reality which we spontaneously believe to be
external the validity of this belief depends. If, therefore, the concrete sense
datum (of "felt externality ") from which this concept is formed, cannot be
shown, by direct intellectual reflection upon it, to be real, i.e. if the data
which are felt (or appear) to be external in normal external sense perception
cannot be seen by intellect reflecting on them to be eo ipso really external,
how can we hope to vindicate such real externality for those data, and such
real validity for the concept of externality, by appealing to any evidence that
can be furnished by another concept, namely, that of causality, if this concept
too be derived, as it is, from immediate data of conscious, concrete (internal)
intuition and (external) perception, while as yet none of these immediate data
have been shown to be themselves externally real?
But the contention that intellect, contemplating the direct
and immediate data of conscious external sense perception, finds
these to constitute an external, material universe distinct from
the Ego, is not without its difficulties. These we shall examine
in the course of the exposition of facts and theories in the para-
graphs that follow. The facts are not very numerous; but the
theories,—from absolute subjectivism, idealism, or scepticism, to
the most "ingenuous" or "naif" realism,—are even bewildering
in their abundance.
CHAPTER XV.
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION: REAL EXISTENCE OF AN
EXTERNAL, MATERIAL UNIVERSE.
106. The Facts of Sense Perception.—I. All men have
an invincible persuasion that certain objects appear to them, and
are perceived by them, as distinct from, and outside of, them-
selves, and as endowed with certain features such as extension,
impenetrability, shape, colour, etc. This feeling of externality,l
of such objects has never been denied by even the most extreme
sceptics.
II. Hence, men spontaneously judge that outside themselves,
and independently of their conscious perceptions, there actually
exist real things endowed with such features and qualities. This
we may call the spontaneous judgment of externality or otherness.
It involves two sorts of judgment, the judgment of existence,—
that a "reality or realities external to the perceiver exist,"—and
the judgment of nature,—that "this reality is such and such,"
e.g. soft, spherical, cold, yellow, sweet, etc.; that "this is an
orange," "that. is an oak," "that is a horse," etc., etc. That
men spontaneously make and believe such judgments is likewise
universally admitted.
III. Antecedently to philosophical reflection men spontane-
ously believe that the existence of a real, external, material
universe, existing independently of their perception of it, is as
indubitably evident to them as their own individual existence.
Nay, when we want to express the strongest intellectual certi-
1 Some authors say that on reflection this feeling of externality can be indubit-
ably detected only in the data of sight; others only in the data of touch; others only
in these two domains of data; others in the data of hearing as well; others even in
the data of taste and smell. Cf. Jeanniere, op. cit., p. 385 n. All sensations
reveal objectivity of course (§ 19). But not all reveal externality, e.g. the organic
sensations whereby we become aware of the internal states and conditions of our
bodies. Similarly, the feeling of voluminousness or extensity, which is held by some
psychologists to characterize the data of touch alone, is held by most to affect the
data of sight as well, and by many to affect in some measure the data of all the
senses. Cf. Jeanniere, op. cit., p. 401, n. 2.
37
38
THEOR y OF KNO WLEDGE
tude of the truth of any judgment we describe it in terms
borrowed from sense perception, we say that such a truth is
manifest, as clear as noonday, palpable, that we see it, etc., etc.
It is admitted that so irresistibly does this persuasion of the
independent existence of an external universe force itself upon
men that even those cannot eradicate it, but continue to act on
it, who come to regard it as theoretically indefensible (37).
IV. We classify the conscious data or objects of sense per-
ception into certain broad, clearly distinct and mutually irre-
ducible domains: into colours, sounds, tastes, smells, organic
states (of bodily pleasure, pain, etc.), pressure, resistance to
muscular effort, heat and cold, size and shape, rest and motion,
position, location, number, etc. It is admitted by all that we
have such diversely qualified data or objects of sense awareness.
V. Even a moderate measure of reflection on the various
qualities which we thus apprehend in the "external" data of
sense awareness, and which we ascribe to things spontaneously
judged to exist outside us and independently of our perception,
will convince us that some of those qualities seem to be more
dependent than others, for what they appear to be, on the actual
condition of the bodily sense organs,1 to be more relative than
others to the self as sentient subject. When, for instance, we
say that this stone is hard, this orange is round, this grass is
green, these clouds are moving; and then that this water is
warm, this wine is mellow, this perfume is pleasing,—we realize
that the former group of qualities belong to the subjects to which
we attribute them, more absolutely and independently of our-
selves, than the latter group do to theirs: that what feels warm
to one hand may feel cold to the other, that the same "thing"
may not "taste" or "smell " the same to different people, or to
ourselves at different times, etc. This broad fact is undisputed;
not so, however, its significance, or its application in detail.
VI. Reflection also reveals, among the qualities of sense data
or objects, another broad distinction which has been recognized
in one form or other at all times by students of sense perception:
1 Or, of the self as a corporeal, organic, conscious subject. The body, with its
sense organs, is apprehended by us in two distinct ways: (a) by our external senses
in the same way as we apprehend the "external" universe, and as similar to the
latter (corporeal, or material, extended, etc.); (b) by the internal, muscular, organic
senses, the functioning of which accompanies that of the external senses and con-
comitantly reveals the bodily organism as the sentient-conscious self or subject.
The former apprehension may be described as objective, the latter as subjective.
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
39
the distinction between what scholastics have called the " proper
sensibles" (sensibilia propria) and the "common sensibles"
(sensibilia communid). The former are the concrete qualities, or
"qualified" data or objects, of each separate sense: colours,
sounds, tastes, odours, pressures or resistances, temperatures,
organic states. The latter are concrete, "qualified" data or ob-
jects, apprehended in common or by more than one sense channel:
shape (forma vel figurd), size or volume (magnitudd), number
(multitudo),1 rest, motion. The former are also called the
"secondary" sense qualities, and the latter the "primary" sense
qualities, of matter (or of " corporeal " or "sense" data).
This division of sense data into "primary" or "common,"
and "secondary" or "proper," is recognized as grounded in
consciously apprehended differences between the two sets of data
respectively. But its significance and implications are much dis-
puted. The former or "common" sensibles are clearly all con-
crete modes of " extensity" or "voluminousness," and appear to
be data of sight2 as well as of touch. Superficial extension (or
coloured surface) certainly appears to be a direct datum of sight.3
The three dimensions of extension (length, breadth, and depth)—
not separately and in the abstract, but together, as "concrete
voluminousness"—are a direct datum of touch (i.e. of the passive
sense of pressure, and the active or muscular sense of motion
and resistance, combined); but whether the third dimension of
space is a direct datum of sight, i.e. whether, independently of
tactual, muscular, and motor sensations, the sense of binocular
vision can or does reveal to us depth or distance from the per-
ceiver, or objects in relief,—is a question to which psychologists
usually reply in the negative.4 But, even so, the appellation,
"common sensibles," is a justifiable description of the concrete
modes of extensity which have been so designated.
107. Their Psychological Explanation and their
Significance for Epistemology.—Now, psychologists are con-
cerned with explaining the origin or genesis, and the growth or
11concrete multitude apprehended through awareness of discontinuity or
interruption in our feelings of magnitude or voluminousness.
2 All the senses apprehend change in intensity of their respective data. The
sense of hearing can thus, at least indirectly and by association, make us aware of
local motion. Sensations of taste, being inseparable from accompanying sensations
of touch, have a distinctly "voluminous" character; those of smell also yield a
vague feeling of extensity.
» C/. Maher, op. cit., p. 87. *Ibid., cf. pp. 129, 135-144.
40
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
development, of the various phenomena just enumerated: of the
conscious feelings of extensity and externality in certain data of
our awareness; of our spontaneous judgment that an external,
material universe exists independently of our awareness; of our
spontaneous conviction that the existence of such a universe is
self-evident; of our spontaneous belief that we know something
of the nature and qualities of this material universe; of our
spontaneous discrimination between our minds, our own bodies,
and external bodies; etc., etc. They are not concerned with the
validity of these spontaneous judgments and beliefs, but only with
the mode of their genesis and development from the primitive
content of consciousness with its vague characteristics of "ex-
tensity" and "externality ". Starting from these primitive data,
they differ in their accounts of the way in which we come to
form the spontaneous judgment and conviction that there exists
a non-Ego or external universe really distinct from, and other
than, and independent of, the Ego.
I. Some maintain that the reality of the non-Ego is given in
external sense perception just as early and just as immediately
as the reality of the Ego is given in all conscious cognition; and
that therefore the spontaneous conviction of the reality of a non-
Ego or external universe is an immediate interpretation of this
originally presented distinction. This position is described as
Perceptionism, or Intuitionism, or the Theory of Immediate or
Presentative Sense Perception}
II. Others maintain that the non-Ego, as distinct from the
Ego, is not a primitive datum of conscious awareness; that only
the Ego is apprehended first and immediately; that from its data
there is evolved and mediated a conscious discrimination or dis-
tinction between a non-Ego and the Ego, and a spontaneous belief
in the distinct reality of the former. This position is variously
described as Representationism,3 or the Theory of Mediate or
Representative or Inferential Sense Perception. But its supporters
differ in regard to the nature of the process by which apprehen-
sion of the non-Ego, and belief in its distinct and independent
reality, are "mediated ": some holding that in the early stages
of the conscious life of the individual all the conscious data are
"internal" or "self" data, and that the individual gradually "ex-
1 Cf. Maher, op. cit., pp. 101 sqq.; Jeanniere, op. cit., pp. 379, 382.
aOr " Conceptionism " (cf. ibid., pp. 223-4, 379),—a designation to be avoided
as fostering a misleading use of a term proper to the domain of intellect.
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
ternalizes" or "projects outward" certain of these data, thus
building up an " external" domain opposed to, and distinguished
from, the "subjective" or "self" domain of reality; others hold-
ing, on the contrary, that the actual process is quite the reverse,
that it is a process of " subjectivation" or " internalization," that
at first all conscious data appear to the individual as a confused
and undifferentiated ocean of "objects," that most of them
are gradually apprehended as " external" through a process by
which others are "subjectivated" to form a conscious, sentient,
organic self or Ego, and thus opposed to, and distinguished from,
the main group as "objective," "external," or non-Ego}
Whichever of these accounts of the genesis of our perception
of, and spontaneous belief in, an external universe be adopted,
the epistemological problem—the question of the validity of this
belief—still remains. If men spontaneously judge that what is
"given" in consciousness, as an "external," "extended" datum,
is a reality other than the Ego,—are they right in judging so?
Is the judgment justifiable before the bar of reason reflecting on
the grounds of it? Or, if from the original data, in which that
alone which is the real Ego is "presented," there is evolved by
some process a mediate awareness wherein a "non-Ego" is
"represented," what rational justification have we for the spon-
taneous judgment which, in asserting the independent existence
of this " non-Ego" or external universe, assumes the validity of the
"representative " or quasi-" inferential " process?
108. The Problems and the Theories.—Can we, reflect-
ing on the data of sense perception, have reasoned or phil-
osophical certitude for the spontaneous judgment and belief
that these data reveal (a) the existence, and (b) something as to
the nature, of an external, material universe distinct from the
perceiving subject or Ego? The answers of philosophers to
these questions have varied from the most extreme subjective
idealism to an equally extreme affirmation of the naif realism of
the credulous and unreflecting mind. Broadly speaking, the
two alternative attitudes—of those who doubt or deny, and
of those who affirm and maintain, that we can have such certi-
tude—may be described as Idealism and Realism respectively.
But there are many different phases and degrees of both.
I. Idealism doubts or denies that anything beyond the
Ego, the psychic facts of the self, can be objects of knowledge,
1 Cf. Jeanniere, op. at., pp. 380-1.
42 THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
can be known really to exist . Hence it is also called Subjectiv-
ism: sceptical if it doubts, dogmatic if it denies the possibility
of such (reasoned) knowledge of a universe beyond the Ego.
This is the logical issue of the Idealist Postulate, that the
mind cannot transcend itself to know anything beyond its
own states: a postulate insinuated by Locke, partially applied
by Berkeley to deny the reality of matter, fully applied by
Hume to reduce all knowledge to awareness of mental "appear-
ances" or "phenomena," and by Mill in his reduction of all
reality to "sensations plus permanent possibilities of sensations ".1
Idealism is absolute or total if it holds the sole knowable reality,
the sole object of knowledge, to be the subject's own conscious
states or "representations ": the position of Fichte, Schelling,
Hegel, Schopenhauer, Renouvier,2 etc. Akin to this is what
Leibniz first called " Solipsism" : the view that the conscious self
is the sole reality—with the unverifiable possibility of other simi-
lar but really distinct conscious "selves ". Idealism is relative
or partial if it admits philosophical certitude as to the existence
of something, some reality, other than the Ego, but interprets
too narrowly the nature, scope, and object of this certitude.
Thus, Berkeley's Immaterialism is subjectivist in so far as it
denies the existence of a material universe as a mind-independ-
ent reality, but is "realist" or "objectivist"3 in so far as it
accords to this universe the reality which consists in its being
a system of perceived, mind-dependent ideas,4 produced in finite
spirits or human minds by the Infinite Spirit, the Deity. Again,
Kant's Transcendental Idealism is a partial or relative idealism
inasmuch as, while it denies that a real non-Ego or mind-in-
dependent reality can ever become an object of knowledge, or
be known, it admits that this (" unknowable") reality must be
thought or postulated as really existing, and that belief in the
validity of this postulate is justifiable. So, too, the agnostic
position of positivism and phenomenism,—in recognizing the
rational necessity of postulating a reality beyond the domain
of the conscious self, and at the same time denying that we can
know anything about this reality,—is a partial or relative ideal-
1 Cf. Ontology, §§ 61, 63, 75.
*Cf. Jeannibre, op. cit., pp. 381, 438.
* Hence it has been described as " objective idealism ". Cf. I.E. Ricord, vol.
xxiv., pp. 280-2; infra, § 123.
4 Entities the esse of which is identically their fercipi (cf. § 102).
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
4J
ism: a position for which Spencer lays claim to the title of
Transfigured Realism}
II. Realism maintains that we have adequate intellectual
justification for (a) the spontaneous judgment that a real,
external, material universe exists independently of our per-
ception of it; and for (6) many of the spontaneous judgments
we form as to its nature and qualities; while (c) reflection can
correct the errors of other spontaneous judgments too hastily
formed by misinterpretation of our sense perceptions. But be-
tween the naif, ingenuous, unreflecting realism which, by over-
looking the part which the sentient self or subject has in
determining how external things "appear" in sense perception,
often erroneously attributes to these external things qualities
or natures which they do not really possess in themselves,—
between this extreme form of realism on the one hand and
certain other extreme or hypercritical forms of realism on the
other hand,—forms which almost merge into idealism by de-
claring all our qualitatively differentiated sense data to be
subjective, conscious products, which are merely symbolically
indicative of the real nature and qualities of the external or
non-self universe,2—there are many intermediate shades of what
is known as moderate or critical realism. Naturally, too, as
regards the manner in which we come to know the indepen-
dent reality of an external universe, the advocates of naif realism
hold the theory of immediate or presentative or intuitional sense
perception; the advocates of hypercritical realism, that of
mediate or representative or inferential sense perception; while
among the supporters of moderate or critical realism some hold
that sense perception is immediate or presentative or intuitional,
others that it is mediate or representative or inferential.3
1 Cf. Jeanniere, op. cit., p. 437. For different kinds of idealism, historical
sketch of its development, and bibliography, cf. ibid., pp. 430-40.
* Ibid., p. 425, n. 2.
3 It may be well to note that the term " inferential " in this general context is
ambiguous. What it can mean as descriptive of the process of sense perception
itself we shall inquire later. Here we need only call attention to the fact that even
if the process of sense perception itself be held to be an immediate intuition of a
presented external sense datum, and even if the spontaneous intellectual processes
whereby we conceive this presented datum and judge it to be really external to us
be held to be not" inferential," but motived by immediately apprehended intellectual,
objective grounds or evidence, we can also, by intellectual reflection on these direct
sensuous and intellectual processes, infer from the data of sense, by means of the
principle of causality (103), that there is a reality external to us, or that it is really
such or such, and that our direct, spontaneous judgment teas justifiable and correct:
44
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
109. Direct Vindication of Belief in the Real Ex-
istence of a Mind-independent, External, Extended,
Material Universe.—We have already shown that reflection
on the facts of consciousness and memory (97-9) justifies our
spontaneous conviction that the Ego is a real substance which
persists self-identically in existence throughout its intermittent
conscious states, and is not the mere series or stream or current
of these states. Will rational reflection also justify our spon-
taneous conviction that of these data the whole domain marked
by the features of "extensity" and "externality," and therefore
designated as "material," is likewise a domain of substantive
realities which persist in their existence independently of their
intermittent presence in consciousness, or of our actual inter-
mittent perceptions of them?—that the "external" "extended,"
or "material " data are really distinct from the percipient subject
or Ego? and that the "extended" but "internal" material
datum which we call "our body" and which we include in the
total, composite reality of the self or Ego, also persists in ex-
istence independently of our intermittent mental awareness of
it? The answer is that rational reflection will justify these
spontaneous convictions and transform them into reasoned or
philosophical certitudes.
If we can justify our conviction that an extended, external
domain of material reality exists independently of, and really
other than, the Ego and its perceptive processes, we shall have
no difficulty in recognizing as also rationally justified the con-
viction that the extended, internal material datum which we call
"our body," and which we regard as united with the conscious,
mental principle of our being to form the composite individual
self, also persists in existence independently of its intermittent
presence in consciousness (116).
How, then, are we to vindicate a reasoned, philosophic
certitude for the former spontaneous judgment?
In the first place by a deliberate intellectual scrutiny of the
character of those concrete conscious data which we have called
"common" and "proper" sensibles. It is an absolutely un-
deniable and universally admitted fact of introspection that some
at least of those data appear or present themselves to conscious-
so that even the perceptionist's fully reasoned conviction or certitude,—that the
directly perceived external reality is indeed external to him,—can be legitimately
described as being, unlike his sense perception, an inferential process.
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
45
ness endowed with the concrete character of "externality" or
"otherness," that they appear or present themselves as external
to, and other than, the conscious, sentient self or Ego: coloured
external surface extension, resistance or impenetrability, size or
volume, shape, spatial continuity or unity, or discontinuity or
multitude, spatial motion or rest,—these undoubtedly appear or
present themselves as external to and other than the percipient
subject. Now if they were not really external to and other than
the Ego, we must ask not only why and how do they appear so,
but also whence could we derive, or how could we possess, the
abstract intellectual concept of "externality" or "otherness-from-
the-Z^," at all (104). At some stage or other in the develop-
ment of the individual's perception-processes certain data are
concretely felt or apprehended as being of such a kind or so
characterized that the individual's intellect derives this concept
from them and interprets them to be really what this concept
represents them to be, viz. external to and other than the self.
But if those consciously apprehended sense data were really only
the self appearing in various phases to the self, and if the felt
concrete character of externality or otherness were merely the
result of subjective processes of the self opposing and externating
certain phases of the self to the self, then the concept of "ex-
ternality" or "otherness" (or "real distinction" in the sense of
"otherness-from-the-self") would be objectively and really a
groundless and invalid concept; and, furthermore, the appear-
ance of the concrete feature of externality in certain sense data
would, as a fact of consciousness, be absolutely unexplained and
unaccounted for, nay, would be inexplicable and unaccountable.
For if the data felt to be external or other than the self were
not really external to and other than the self, why should they
be felt so? Or what intelligible ground is there for an assumed
unconscious sense process whereby the self is supposed to "ex-
ternate" certain phases of itself, and thus to mediate and lead
to what would be the illusive and deceptive intellectual processes
of spontaneously conceiving and judging this "externality" or
"otherness" of such data to be real? There is no rational
ground for the gratuitous supposition of such a process,—a pro-
cess which, if real, would involve in our very nature as cognitive
beings a radical and incurable self-deception.
But if, on the contrary, such data are really external to and
other than the self, there is every reason why they should be felt
46
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
to be so,—and as we shall see presently, there is no reason why
they should not. Their character of concrete, felt externality,
then stands explained. The abstract intellectual concept of ex-
ternality or otherness is grounded on and derived from an ob-
jectively real datum. And the spontaneous judgment which, by
means of this concept, pronounces such data of sense perception
to constitute an external material universe existing independently
of the perceiving subject, is seen to be rationally justified. More-
over, just as conscious states, processes, activities, etc., and the
conscious data of memory, involve the reality of the self as a per-
manent substance, an abiding, self-identical, substantial subject
and agent of these processes (97, 99), so the concrete sense
apprehension of the "external," "extended" sense data in ques-
tion involves the judgment that size, shape, three-dimensional
spatial extension, etc., are qualities of a persisting material sub-
stance. Thus, the "sense evidence" or "appearance-to-sense"
of extended externality, is adequate "intellectual evidence" for
the reasoned judgment: "There exists, distinct from and inde-
pendently of the Ego and its conscious perceptive processes, a
reality which has the substance-mode of being, i.e. which exists
in itself, and which is material, i.e. endowed at least with the
attribute or quality of spatial extension ".
110. Solution of the General A Priori Difficulty of
Idealism against this Belief.—Before confirming this con-
clusion by appeal to the principle of causality (103), or attempt-
ing other conclusions which will raise certain difficulties in detail,
we may here examine briefly one broad difficulty against the
argument by which we have reached the conclusion just formu-
lated.
How can a datum of conscious perception or awareness be
really external to or really other than the conscious self or sub-
ject? If there be such a reality, a reality which has an existence
or esse beyond, outside, independent of, and apart from percep-
tion, apart from what has presence or esse in consciousness, is it
not clearly impossible for the conscious, sentient self to perceive,
or become conscious or aware of, such independent esse or
existence? All that we become aware of must be present in
consciousness, and we can become aware of it only in so far as it
is present in consciousness. To speak, therefore, of perceiving
or becoming aware of any existence, or thing existing, outside
and beyond and independently of consciousness, is a contradiction
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
47
in terms. Whether or not the only "esse" of "things" is their
"percipi" at all events their only perceivable or knowable "esse"
is their perceived " esse," i.e. the "esse" which they have in and
for the consciousness of the perceiver: and whatever this "per-
ceived being" is, it certainly appertains to the perceiver; it is
certainly something in and of and for the perceiver; and it cer-
tainly is not a "being" or "esse" beyond and distinct from and
independent of the perceiver. This latter sort of being, if there
be such, must be by its very terms unperceivable and unknow-
able. Therefore the concretely felt feature of "externality" or
"otherness" in certain sense data must be itself something in
the perceiver, and cannot prove those data to be really other
than, and independent of, the perceiver. —
Idealists, both "subjective " and "objective," ring the changes
on this objection indefinitely.1 It is at the root of the idealist
theory of the relativity of all knowledge, according to which the
object of knowledge is necessarily immanent in the knowing sub-
ject, and the latter cannot possibly become aware or cognizant
of any reality transcending the conscious self or subject. We have
met it more than once already (17, 19, 35, 75, 101). It rests
partly on a confusion and partly on a gratuitous assumption.
When we say that we perceive a datum which is really ex-
ternal to and other than the self, we do not mean that this datum,
when being perceived, stands out of all relation to the perceiver.
To say so would indeed be a contradiction in terms.2 The
datum must be cognitively related to, or cognitively one with,
the perceiver (20). If there be a reality external to, and in-
dependent of, the perceiver, then in order to be perceived it
must become cognitively present to, or one with, the perceiver.
It is therefore a misconception of the realist's position to re-
present this as involving the contention that a thing can be
perceived out of all relation to the perceiver, or known out of all
relation to the knower, or, in other words, that we can perceive
an unperceived thing or know an unknown thing. This would
indeed be a contradiction; "but there is no contradiction or
absurdity in the proposition 'A material world of three dimen-
sions has existed for a time unperceived and unthought of by
1C/. infra, § 123; Maher, op. cit., pp. 1ll, 157-9; Prichard, op. cit., pp.
115-18, 125; Jeanniere, op. cit., pp. 444-6.
* Cf. Maher, op. cit., p. 158, n. 26.
43
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
any created being, and then revealed itself to human minds'".1
And this is the veritable attitude of the realist.
The condition that the external or non-self reality, in order
to be perceived, must become cognitively present to, or one with,
the perceiving self, obviously renders not the reality itself, but the
perception of the reality, dependent on and relative to the per-
ceiver. That such an external, non-self reality can reveal itself,
or become present, to the perceiving self, has never yet been
disproved: and we hope to indicate later how we may conceive
this revelation to take place (cf. § 75). But we do not hope to
show thereby how the fact of conscious cognition takes place.
For the fact of any conscious being becoming aware of anything,
or perceiving or knowing anything, whether this perceived or
known thing be the reality of the perceiver or a reality other
than the perceiver, is an absolutely ultimate and unanalysable
fact which must be simply accepted as such and which cannot
possibly be "explained," or resolved into any terms or stated
in any terms which do not themselves involve and assume the
fact which they are purporting to explain.2
This brings us to the gratuitous assumption which, in addi-
tion to the misconception of the realist's position, is involved in
the objection we are considering: the assumption, namely, that
whatever is an object of awareness or cognition3 must be im-
manent in the conscious subject in the sense of being a determina-
tion of the latter as conscious, in the sense that its reality must
be mind-dependent or a manifestation of the conscious subject,
and cannot be anything transcending, or existing beyond and
independently of, the latter. Thus understood, the assumption
appears to be a misconception of the true principle that whatever
is perceived or known in any way, whatever is an object of aware-
ness, must be in cognitive relation or union with the perceiver or
knower,—as an apprehended object of the conscious, cognitive
subject. This is universally true: and it is just as true of the
reality of the knower (as object of self-cognition) as it is of reality
1 Maher, op. cit., p. in, n. 7. Cf. Mercier, op. cit., § 148, p. 405.
*C/. Prichard, op. cit., p. 124.
'To hold that the direct and immediate objects or data of conscious sense aware-
ness or cognition are entitatively immanent in the Ego as percipient subject, but that
they represent realities other than the Ego, so that the latter can mediately or in-
ferentially perceive the non-Ego (106, 108), and can through objectively and really
valid concepts attain to a reasoned intellectual knowledge of a real, external universe
(103-5),—this position is of course not idealism, but a form of critical realism.
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
4y
other than the knower (19, 20). But to say that a reality, in
order to be known, must be relative to, or dependent on, the know
ing subject in this sense, is to say not that the reality itself, bu1
its becoming known, its becoming present to the knower, its actual
cognition by the knower, is dependent on the knower: that in
order to be known the reality must be actually related to the
knower by becoming cognitively present to and cognitively one
with the latter. Now this is very different from saying that a
reality, in order to be known, must be relative to the knower in
the sense that the reality itself, and not merely its presence to
the knower or its cognition by the knower, must be immanent in,
and dependent on, and determined by,—and therefore in ultimate
analysis be partially identical with, and be a partial phase or mani-
festation of,—the identical reality which is the knower. This
latter is the position of the subjective idealist. As we have
pointed out already (101) it seems to spring from the latent
assumption that there is some special and peculiar difficulty in
conceiving how any being can become aware of reality other than
itself, which is not encountered when we contemplate the possi-
bility of a being becoming aware of the reality which is itself.
But reflection will show this latent assumption to be groundless;
for after all, the identity of a being with itself throws no light on
the ultimate how and why of the fact of conscious cognition or
awareness. The question, How can a being become aware of the
reality which is itself, or become the known object of itself as
conscious subject? is just as unanswerable as the question, How
can a being become aware of reality other than itself? (19).
For the general question, How can a being become aware of
anything? brings us up against a fact which we must simply
accept as ultimate and unanalysable.
To the observation that a stick or a stone or a tree or a plant is identical
with itself, and yet not therefore aware of itself, so that identity throws no
light on the fact of cognition (19), the subjective idealist would probably
reply (a) that perhaps these things are, for all we know, aware of themselves;
and (b) that from our present (epistemological) standpoint, inquiring as we
are into the conditions of the possibility of knowledge, we must start with
the conscious events of the individual mind, and therefore do not yet know
whether such things as a stick, or a stone, etc., are substantive and indepen-
dent realities, and consequently cannot put them on the same level as the
conscious Ego, or reason about them as we may about the latter, when
exploring the conditions involved in awareness: wherefore it is idle to take
such things as these, which are supposed to be exclusively objects of aware-
VOL. II. 4
THE OR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
ness, as helping us in any way to determine the conditions of the possibility
of this peculiar phenomenon or fact of awareness in a reality (such as the
conscious Ego) which is known to be subject as well as object of aware-
ness.
In reply to (a), which the idealist urges merely as a defensive tactic, we
need only observe that at least until such philosophical theories as panlog-
ism or idealistic monism,—which maintain consciousness or cognition to be
essential to all reality,—are proved, it is certainly the more reasonable course
to accept as true the spontaneous conviction of mankind that such things as
sticks and stones, trees and plants, are not endowed with consciousness or
awareness.
It is, however, the second line of reasoning, (b), that reveals the real
position of the idealist, and it is interesting to see whither it leads him. For
if the idealist really starts, as he professes to start, merely with the conscious
current or series of objects of awareness, and with no assumption whatsoever,
except, perhaps, that of a hypothetical subject aware of such objects, then we
have a right to ask him with what sort of "being" or "esse" he conceives
this hypothetical subject to be endowed. If he says that the only "being"
or "esse" he can legitimately ascribe to anything is the "being" or "esse"
which consists in "percipi," in "being perceived" in "being object of
awareness," then he cannot endow his hypothetical conscious subject or Ego
with any|being other than this, i.e. the "perceived being" of the intermittent
current of objects of awareness; and so he has not yet gained any legitimate
knowledge of the conscious subject or Ego as a real, substantial, permanent,
abiding being, with an " esse" or existence that is real in the sense of being
other than and independent of the "perceived being" or "percipi" of
objects of awareness: the only "conscious subject " or Ego to which he has
attained is the ever-changing, intermittent flow of " perceived" or "percept "-
entities; and this does not help him. Such is the nihilistic impasse of the
"logical idealism " of Remacle and Weber, to which Kant's subjectivism, and
indeed all subjectivisms, ultimately lead.1
If, on the other hand, our idealist ascribes to his hypothetical "conscious
subject " or Ego a being which as to its,own reality is beyond and indepen-
dent of the intermittent modes of "perceived being " which he supposes it to
assume as object of its own awareness, then after all he is recognizing the
possibility of a being having real existence independent of the "presence " or
"perceived being" which it may also acquire by becoming an object of
awareness. And if he accords such an absolute or mind-independent mode
of existence to the reality which he thinks of as the conscious subject or Ego,
is he not eo ipso claiming for himself the power of "transcending" the
"conscious presence " or "perceived being," and attaining to the "absolute"
or "mind-independent " being, of a reality, viz. the reality which is the Ego,
no less than the realist does when he claims for the mind the power of
"transcending" the "conscious presence " and attaining to the "absolute"
or "mind-independent" being of a reality, viz. the reality which is the non-
Ego f
iCf. Jeannibrb, op. cit., p. 447; Mbrcihr, op. cit., §§ 147-8; Origines de
la Psychologic contemporaine, chap. v.
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
5'
Nevertheless idealists cling to their postulate that the mind
can know only what is "relative" to it in the sense of being
mind-dependent, as if this were a self-evident axiom; and they
try to make it plausible by confounding it with the really self-
evident truth that whatever is known by the mind must be "in"
the mind or "relative" to the mind in the sense of being cog-
nitively related or present to the mind. It is only in virtue of
such a confusion that they can confront realism with the specious
difficulty we have been examining. The worthlessness of such
a line of argument is clearly exposed by Prichard in the following
passage:—1
"At first sight it seems a refutation of the plain man's view to argue thus:
•The plain man believes the spatial world to exist whether any one knows it
or not. Consequently, he allows the world is outside the mind. But to be
known a reality must be inside the mind. Therefore the plain man's view
renders knowledge impossible.' But as soon as it is realized that 'inside the
mind' and 'outside the mind' are metaphors, and, therefore, must take their
meaning from the context, it is easy to see that the argument either rests on
an equivocation or assumes the point at issue. The assertion that the world
is outside the mind, being only a metaphorical expression of the plain man's
view, should only mean that the world is something independent of the mind,
as opposed to something inside the mind, in the sense of dependent upon it,
or mental. But the assertion that to be known, a reality must be inside the
mind, if it is to be incontestably true, should only mean that a reality, to
be apprehended, must really be object of apprehension. And in this case
'being inside the mind,' since it only means 'being object of apprehension,'
is not the opposite of 'being outside the mind' in the previous assertion.
Hence, on this interpretation the second assertion is connected with the first
only apparently and by an equivocation; there is really no argument at all.
If, however, the equivocation is to be avoided, 'inside the mind' in the
second assertion must be the opposite of 'outside the mind' in the first, and
consequently the second must mean that a reality, to be known, must be de-
pendent on the mind, or mental. But in this case the objection to the plain
man's view is a petitioprincipti, and not an argument."
in. Indirect Confirmation of this Belief by Appeal
to the Principle of Causality.—In the second last section
(109) we vindicated a reasoned or philosophic certitude for the
belief that "there exists, distinct from the Ego, an external
domain of reality which appears as extended or material ". The
argument was based on the evidence furnished by direct intel-
lectual scrutiny of the data of conscious external sense perception.
We have likewise shown that our intellectual concept of "other-
1 Op. cit., pp. 124-5.
4*
5^
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
ness-from-the Ego" or "externality," derived from those data, is
objectively and really valid (105). We are therefore now in a
position to corroborate the conclusion of our argument by con-
sidering our spontaneous interpretation of sense perception in the
light of a principle, the universal validity of which has likewise
been already established (65, 66, 93)—the principle of causality.
Those supporters of realism 1 who in the present general context rely
mainly or exclusively on the argument from causality to establish the phil-
osophical certitude of our knowledge of an external world, emphasize the
universal real validity of the concept of cause; and consider the argument
peculiarly efficacious as against idealists.- But even though the concept is uni-
versally applicable to contingent reality, and even if the idealist admits this,
the latter has still to be convinced that there is contingent reality beyond the
domain of the subject's consciousness,3—or beyond the reality of the Ego if
he recognizes a real Ego as subject and cause of conscious states. And of
this we can hope to convince him, if at all, only by proving to him that the
concept of " reality-other-than-the Ego," which he possesses in common with
us, is an objectively and really valid concept. But how can we prove that
it is? Only by pointing out that the sensuously felt character of "extended
externality" in certain of our sense data can be seen by intellect to be the
source from which the concept is derived, and to be therefore for intellect
adequate objective evidence of the real validity of the concept (104, 105).
In other words, by the same line of reasoning, by the same sort of direct in-
tellectual appeal to the characteristics of conscious sense data, as we have
employed in our main argument for the mind-independent existence of a
real non-self universe (109). It is because we believe that if realism cannot
be effectively vindicated, as against idealism, by that class of consideration,
neither can it be effectively vindicated, apart from such consideration, by the
principle of causality alone (cf. 105-6),—it is for that reason we now bring for-
ward the argument from causality merely as corroborative, and not in the first
place.
1 Cf. Jeanmere, op. cit., pp. 224-7, 382-92; Mercier, op. cit., % 140, pp. 384-9.
»C/. vol. i., §35, p. 134.
5 Kant, for instance, and English phenomenists, admit the validity of causality
(as understood by them in the sense of a provisionally, or an absolutely, necessary
sequence, respectively) as applied within the whole domain of empirical conscious-
ness. And even when we have proved against Kant that it is validly applied in in-
ferring an ultra-conscious cause of this whole domain, the principle itself will not
enable us to determine whether this latter cause is one or manifold. We prove it
to be manifold,—to be in part the real Ego, and in part a whole pluralistic system
of realities external to and other than the real Ego (all alike themselves contingent,
and therefore implying a Supreme Uncaused First Cause),—not by the principle of
causality alone, but only by the collateral use of another and distinct intellectual
concept, namely, that of real distinction or real otherness, a concept whose real
validity, as marking off the "Ego- or self-xeaWty" from "»o»-se//'-realitie8" (and
these latter from one another), must be independently established. We have shown
this concept, as applied to the distinction between the Ego and the non-Ego, to
be really valid because grounded in characteristics of the conscious sense data from
which it is derived (104-105).
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
53
We have already proved, as against Kant,1 that the Ego,
through its conscious activities, apprehends itself as a reality;
that Descartes, in emphasizing the absolutely indisputable char-
acter of our knowledge of the real self in his principle, Cogito,
ergo sum, was only re-echoing the traditional teaching of scholas-
ticism from the days of St Augustine (29, 34). Now this self
reveals itself as consciously affected by what we may call an ever-
changing panorama of apprehended data or objects, namely, the
proper and common sensibles. Our conscious perceptions of
these data are contingent events. Therefore, by virtue of the
principles of sufficient reason and causality (64, 65,) these con-
scious perceptions of data or objects have an adequate cause.
But such adequate cause cannot be the self, or anything in the
self or really constituting or appertaining to the self. Therefore
there must be, beyond and really distinct from the self, a mind-
independent reality which, co-operating with the consciously per-
cipient self, will adequately account for the perceptions de facto
experienced by the latter. Hence there exists, distinct from the
self, and independent of perception, a reality—which we call the
external, material universe.2
Let us consider the steps in this argument . That the Ego
has conscious perceptions whereby data or objects "externally-
appearing," "extended," "coloured," "moving," "resisting,"
"sounding," etc., are presented in consciousness, is a fact ad-
mitted by even the most extreme sceptics and subjectivists: as
also is the fact that these perceptions are contingent events, in the
sense that they are not self-explaining, that they come and go,
appear and disappear, begin to be and cease to be, and so call for
explanation or demand a cause. And the objective, real validity
of the principle of causality has been already established. Next,
the adequate cause of them cannot be the self. Why? This
needs a little reflection.
The main reason is that we feel ourselves passive in experienc-
ing such perceptions. Hence Kant recognizes that the empirical
content of perception is given to us from without, that to account
for our perceptions there is and must be a reality beyond and
independent of them, and of the self as empirically revealed
1 Cf. vol. i., §§ 97. 99.100. Cf. infra, § 134.
* Berkeley's alternative inference—" Therefore there exists, distinct from and
independent of our minds, a cause of these conscious states, which cause is the
Divine Spirit"—will be examined later, § 123. Cf. Jeannierh, op. tit., pp. 40^4.
54
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
in consciousness (50, 51,74). Hence, too, Fichte claims that
epistemology must take as starting-point the fact that in the
content of consciousness there is, besides the mobile, subjectively
determined portion, another portion independent of subjective
contingencies and inseparable from what he describes as the
feeling of necessity} We feel ourselves passive, impressed, under-
going impressions, in sense perception. That is, though the per-
ceptions are ours, though it is we that elicit or exercise the
conscious, perceptive acts, still we feel them as not being wholly
determined by ourselves in regard to what they reveal to us. As
to the specific character of the various data or objects revealed
to us in perception (i.e. "quoad specificationem"), they appear to
arise or take place in us or to present this specific character to
us, independently of ourselves; and therefore to have, as partial
cause of their concrete happening, some reality other than the
self. Reflection will confirm this spontaneous belief.
(1) It is not merely my will that determines these percep-
tions. I cannot have them by merely willing to have them.
And as to what they are, when they happen, they are inde-
pendent of my will. I cannot have the perceptions which
consist in "seeing Rome," or "hearing music," or "carrying a
weight," or "tasting sugar," or "inhaling the perfume of violets"
by merely wishing to have such perceptions. And on the other
hand, when I am in the condition in which I do actually ex-
perience any such perception I cannot cease to experience it
merely by wishing it to cease.
(2) Nor is it my imagination that determines such percep-
tions. There is the most marked and indisputable conscious
difference between the panorama of data or objects brought into
consciousness by the play of the imagination in fancies, day-
dreams, reveries, etc.,—between what are called " mental images"
or "phantasmata,"—on the one hand, and the data or objects of
sense perception,2 or what are rightly called percepts, on the other.
Psychologists and philosophers have minutely analysed and
abundantly illustrated these differences.3 The former class of
data are largely under the control of the will: we can direct, con-
1 Fichtc's Werke, i., 41a,—apud Mbrcier, op. cit., p. 385. To this " feeling of
necessity " belong the feelings of " extensity" and " externality ".
* Including the perception of organic states, organic pleasure or pain, etc., in the
perceiver's own body.
'Cf. Balhes, Fundamintal Philosophy, Book II., chap. iv.
VALIDITY OF SENSE PERCEPTION
55
trol, modify the order in which such images present themselves;
we can separate, combine, rearrange the images as we please; we
can thus "produce" or "construct" new data or objects from
the remembered materials of perception; and the power of the
"productive imagination" is only limited by the range of those
materials and its own finiteness. The latter class,—the percepts,
—are, as we saw, beyond the control of the will: the order in
which they succeed each other is not consciously determined by
us, but is felt to be determined by something other than the
self. Moreover, the two classes of data have been distinguished
as "faint" or "weak," and "strong" or "vivid" states, or (as
Hume named them) "ideas" and "impressions," on account of
the superior definiteness, clarity and solidity of the percepts as
compared with the images. Finally, in experiencing the latter
we are conscious that we ourselves, by our own active exercise of
imagination, are producing (not ex inhilo, but from the remembered
data of perception) the flow or current of mental objects; while
in experiencing the former we are rather conscious of passively
undergoing impressions made on us by something independent of
the conscious Ego.
(3) Nor is it my thought that determines such perceptions
or originates such data or objects. By thought the individual
self or Ego elaborates logical relations, judgments, systems of
knowledge, sciences, concerning the domain of perceived data;
but it certainly does not produce or construct this domain.
(4) But perhaps the same Ego, which consciously perceives
these data, itself constructs or produces them by an internal, in-
stinctive, unconsciously operating influence of its own nature?
Well, if it did, such influence would have no other claim than its
blind, unconscious character, to be described as an "instinct".
For the forms of energy we describe as " instincts" in sentient
beings follow fixed laws and are uniform and circumscribed in
their results. But there is nothing of this in the ever-changing
panorama of percepts which constitute the world of any indivi-
dual perceiver's sense experience. Psychologists can with some
success explore and formulate the laws according to which "in-
stincts " operate; but who has ever dreamt of seeking or formu-
lating laws according to which the world of each individual's
sense experience unfolds itself in the order, and with the qualities,
which actually characterize it?
(5) But, dismissing the term "instinctive," may it not finally
56
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
be urged that, for all we know, it may be the real Ego itself that
in some unconscious way, and by some unknown and unknowable
laws, produces this whole panorama of sense percepts which we
—spontaneously and inevitably, but so far as reflecting reason
goes, unwarrantably—believe to be a domain of reality other
than, and external to, the self,—unwarrantably, since on this
possible hypothesis it would be but a phase or manifestation of
the real self? Perhaps,—to use the picturesque words of H uxley,1
—"For any demonstration that can be given to the contrary
effect, the collection of perceptions which makes up our con-
sciousness may be an orderly phantasmagoria, generated by the
Ego unfolding its successive scenes on the background of the
abyss of nothingness; as a firework, which is but cunningly
arranged combustibles, grows from a spark into a corruscation,
and from a corruscation into figures and words and cascades of
devouring flames, and then vanishes into the darkness of night".
The concession Huxley had just made to realism was that
"there may be a real something which is the cause of our experi-
ence".2 And this something he now declares to be a hypo-
thetical and unknowable real Ego,—in the sceptical spirit of
Hume. Kant, as we have seen, so far from refuting this scepticism
—which was the avowed object of his Critique (46, 48)—once
more declared the real Ego to be unknowable; and straightway
illogically asserted a real distinction between the unknowable
real Ego and the equally unknowable real non-Ego.
But, assuming that the idealist admits at least a real Ego,
how are we to meet his assertion that perhaps the whole domain
of data or objects of sense perception, i.e. the seemingly external
material universe, is after all a creation of this real Ego, and
therefore not really distinct from, and external to, the latter?
Let us see what the supposition entails as a possible interpreta-
tion of experience. A simple example will help us.3 Standing
at the door and looking into the street, I consciously perceive a
succession of data or objects: men, horses, trams, cyclists, etc.,
passing. Closing and opening my eyes alternately I apprehend
different objects after each interval. My action is certainly the
cause of my seeing or not seeing (i.e. the cause quoad exercitium
actus). But my action of opening my eyes and seeing is not the
cause of the order and diversity and variety of the perceived data
1 Huxley's Hume, chap. Hi., p. 81,—apud Ricbaby, First Principles, p. 273.
* Ibid. * Cf. jbannlirE, op. cit., p. 3gi.
