

\
EPISTEMOLOGY
OR THB
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
BY THE SAME AUTHOR
THE SCIENCE OF LOGIC. An Inquiry into the
Principles of Accurate Thought and Scientific
Method. 2 vols. 8vo. Vol. I. Conception, Judg-
ment, and Inference. 7s. 6d. net. Vol. II.
Method, Science, and Certitude. 71. 6d. net.
ONTOLOGY, or the Theory of Being. An Intro-
duction to General Metaphysics. 8vo, 10s. 6d. net.
HISTORY OF MEDIEVAL PHILOSOPHY. By
M. De Wulf, LL.D., Ph.D., D.Litt., Professor at
the University of Louvain. Translated by P.
Coffey, Ph.D. 8vo, 10s. 6d. net.
SCHOLASTICISM OLD AND NEW. An Intro-
duction to Scholastic Philosophy, Medieval and
Modern. By M. De Wulf. Translated by P.
Coffey, Ph.D. 8vo, 6s. net.
LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
LONdON, NeW YORK, BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, ANd MAdRAS
EPISTEMOLOGY
OR THE
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
AN INTRODUCTION TO GENERAL METAPHYSICS
P.^COFFEY, Ph.D. (Louvain)
PROFeSSOR OF LOGIC ANd MeTAPHYSICS, MAYNOOTH COLLeGe, IReLANd
IN TWO VOLUMES
Vol. I
PART I. THE NATURE OF THE INQUIRY
PART II. INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE: JUDGMENT
PART III. INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE: CONCEPTION

V i': - /
LONGMANS, GREEN AND CO.
39 PATERNOSTER ROW, LONDON
FOURTH AVENUE & 30th STREET, NEW YORK
BOMBAY, CALCUTTA, AND MADRAS
1917
GIFT
JAN J O '30
. '- ,
i a 17
102911
v.!"
4
TO
HIS EMINENCE, CARDINAL MERCIER
ARCHBISHOP OF MECHLIN
FOUNDER AND FIRST DIRECTOR
OF THE INST1TUT SUPERIEUR DE PHILOSOPHIE
AT THE
CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY OF LOUVAIN—
ENLIGHTENED EXPONENT
OF THE CHRISTIAN PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE
AND FEARLESS ADVOCATE
OF ITS RIGHTFUL SUPREMACY IN TROUBLED TIMES—
AS A SMALL TOKEN
OF GRATITUDE AND VENERATION
FROM A FORMER PUPIL
THIS WORK
IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED
BY
THE AUTHOR
PREFACE.
The present work, which was commenced on the publi-
cation of the author's Ontology, is written from the same
general standpoint as the Ontology and his earlier treatise
on The Science of Logic. It aims at applying the principles
of Scholasticism to the solution of the problems raised by
a critical inquiry into the validity of knowledge and the
grounds of certitude. It does not purport to be in any
sense a history of theories of knowledge, or to supply
anything like an adequate bibliography of works on the
subject. It is primarily a text-book for the use of uni-
versity students in philosophy, though it is hoped that a
perusal of it may be found helpful to all who desire a closer
acquaintance with the attitude of modern scholastic writers
towards the critical problems which almost monopolize the
attention of philosophers nowadays. It is needless to
emphasize the growing importance of such problems in
this age of restless inquiry and scepticism. Nor will a
text-book in English from the standpoint of Scholasticism
be deemed superfluous.
Kant's theory of knowledge is the only non-scholastic
theory examined in any considerable detail: because most
of the modern theories draw their inspiration directly or
indirectly from principles propounded in the Critiques, so
that the student who can appraise these principles on their
merits will be in a position to deal with those theories in
whatever guise they may confront him. In his exposition
and criticism of Kant's speculative philosophy the author
has made free use of H. A. Prichard's valuable work
vii
viii
PREFACE
on Kant's Theory of Knowledge? and begs gratefully to
acknowledge his deep indebtedness. He owes much,
likewise, to Cardinal Mercier's well-known treatise on
Criteriology?—the first serious attempt to vindicate the
superiority of the Scholastic theory of knowledge as com-
pared with the Kantian and other non-scholastic theories.
Finally, his acknowledgments are due to the Rev. Pere
Jeanniere, S.J., whose recently published Latin text-
book,3 breathing the spirit and developing the teaching of
the Louvain neo-scholasticism, is in every way excellent,
and has been consulted with profit. Clear, comprehensive,
compendious, and extensively documented, it deserves a
wide welcome in Catholic colleges and seminaries.
For the rest, the doctrines and views propounded in
the present work are of course drawn from, and based
on, the rational principles embodied in the teaching of
St. Thomas Aquinas and the other great masters of the
traditional Aristotelian Scholasticism: which, it may per-
haps be necessary to observe, does not mean what non-
scholastic philosophers might be tempted to interpret it
as meaning, that those doctrines are presented for accept-
ance on the ground of authority. They are put forward
on their intrinsic merits, and by these alone they must be
judged.
As a rule the more advanced portions and detailed
discussions are printed in smaller type, so that these, as
well as certain sections or even whole chapters, may be
omitted or postponed for a second reading at the discre-
tion of the teacher when the book is being used for class
1 Kant's Theory of Knowledge, by H. A. Prichard, Fellow of Trinity College,
Oxford. Oxford: at the Clarendon Press, i9o9.
8 Criteriologie Gen£rale, oh Theorie Generate de la Certitude, par D.
Mercier, Professeur de philosophie et directeur de l'institut supeneur de philosophie,
a l'universite' catholique de Louvain. 6me edit., i9o6.
3 Criteriologia, vel Critica Cognitionis Certae. Auctore Renato Jeanniere,
S.J., in Collegio Jersiensi Professore. Paris : Beauchesne, 1912. Pp. 616, 8vo,
PREFACE
ix
work. Moreover, since the same general problems recur
repeatedly in different contexts, and are discussed and
illustrated from a variety of standpoints, it is only by
collating these that the student will gain an adequate
understanding and appreciation of the solutions arrived
at in the course of the inquiry. He will be enabled to
bring together in this way all that is said on any particular
topic, not only by making use of the indexes at the end
of each volume, but by consulting the cross-references to
the various sections, as given in parentheses, in the text
itself.
CONTENTS OF VOLUME I.
PAGE
Preface vii
INTRODUCTION.
1. Epistemology: its Place in Philosophy i
2. Bearing of Epistemology on Spontaneous Convictions, on the Sciences,
and on Religious Belief 5
3. Conspectus of Problems raised by Reflective Thought .... 8
4. Rise and Development of Theories of Knowledge: Historical Outlines . 12
5. Epistemology not an Introduction to Metaphysics but a Department of
Metaphysics 22
PART I. THE NATURE OF THE INQUIRY.
CHAPTER I.
The Terms and Data of the Inquiry.
6. Cognition. Knowledge. Science. Belief. Faith .... 25
7. Doubt. Opinion. Conviction. Certitude 31
8. Cognitive and Non-cognitive States of Consciousness. Consciousness,
Knowledge, and Objectivity 36
9. Truth. Error. Ignorance 39
10. Faculties and Sources of Knowledge. Classification of Spontaneous
Convictions 43
11. Irresistible Certitude and Freely Formed Convictions .... 49
12. Influence of the Will on Free Convictions 51
13. Reasonableness of Free Convictions: Certitude of Science and Certitude
of Belief or Faith 53
14. Bearing of Intellectual and Moral Discipline on Free Convictions and on
"Free Thought" 56
15. Universally Entertained Spontaneous Convictions: their Bearing on
Human Life 59
16. Spontaneous Conviction or Certitude not always True: Hence the Origin
of Critical Investigation 66
CHAPTER II.
; The Scope and Instruments of the Inquiry.
17. The Real Problems to which Reflection on Knowledge gives rise . . 71
18. Subject and Object of Knowledge. The Knowing Subject ... 74
19. "Object" in the Sense of (1) Whatever is Real; (2) Whatever we are
aware of 76
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
20. "Mental Presence " or " Objectivity to Subject," and " Real Being " or
"Real Objectivity" 78
21. Alternative Solutions of Questions raised by Mental Objectivity . 79
22. Epistemological Sense of "Object of Knowledge" and "Objectivity of
Knowledge". Truth of Knowledge . ... . . .84
23. Alternative Statements of the General Problem of Epistemology . . 86
24. General Data and Conditions of the Investigation 87
CHAPTER III.
The Method of the Inquiry.
25. Initial Attitude of the Subject towards his Capacity for Discovering Truth
with Certitude 90
26. Difficulties against this Attitude 92
27. The Question of Method in Critical Inquiry. Doubt as a Method . . 94
28. Real Doubt and " Methodic" Doubt Compared. "Methodic" Doubt
never Real. "Negative Methodic Doubt" . . . .95
29. Legitimate Use and Limits of Methodic Doubt 102
30. Descartes' Employment of Real Doubt as a Method .... 109
31. Criticism of Descartes'Doubt 112
32. What sort of Doubt is Lawful regarding the Real Objectivity of Self-
Evident Judgments? 118
33. Their Real Objectivity not a Matter for Logical Demonstration but for
Intuition through Reflective Analysis 120
34. Inconsistencies Consequent on Excessive Doubt 125
35. The Opposite Mistake: Excessive Dogmatism r27
CHAPTER IV.
Unjustifiable Issue of the Inquiry: Scepticism.
36. Order of Problems 135
37. Forms of Scepticism 136
38. Its Main Historical Manifestations 138
39. Critique of Scepticism 142
PART II. INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE: JUDGMENT.
CHAPTER V.
Necessary Judgments: English Subjectivism.
40. Objectivity of the Necessary Nexus Asserted in Immediate Judgments
of the Ideal Order 148
41. Subjective Necessity through Association 149
42. Subjective Necessity through Evolution 154
43. The Test of Inconceivability 157
44. Relative and Absolute Inconceivability .... ... 160
45. Is Experience of Absolutely Necessary Relations between Thought-
Objects Conditioned by Subjective Mental Forms? . . . . 167
TABLE OF CONTENTS xiii
CHAPTER VI.
Necessary Judgments: Kant's Theory Expounded.
paqe
46. General Outline of Kant's Theory of Knowledge 168
47. Necessary and Universal Judgments described as "A Priori" . . . 174
48. Those of them that Amplify our Knowledge claimed to be " Synthetic-a-
priori" 176
49. Even Concepts, regarded as "Objective," i.e. as Necessarily and Uni-
versally Valid, claimed to be "Synthetic-a-priori" . . . . 180
50. Analysis of "A Priori" Conditions of Knowledge in Sensibility and in
Understanding 181
51. The "A Priori" Forms of Sense Intuition 183
52. Conception and Judgment. "A Priori" Forms of the Understanding . 184
53. Their Application in Mathematics and Physics i89
54. The " Illusion" of Metaphysics 191
55. The "Copernican Revolution" 194
56. The Influence and the Issues of Kant's Teaching 197
CHAPTER VII.
Necessary Judgments: Kant's Theory Examined.
57. The Case for the Critique of Pure Reason 201
58. "A Priori" Forms neither Essential nor Sufficient to account for
Necessary and Universal Judgments 202
59. Significance of the " Critique ": its Thesis Mutually Destructive . . 206
60. How the Function of "A Priori Synthesis" is described as Permeating
Judgment, Conception, and even Perception 209
61. How the Necessity-and-Universality of the Apprehended Product of the
Synthesis is Subjective 213
62. Grades of Necessity in Judgments. Singular Judgments. Validity of
Concepts. The Problem Stated 216
63. Kant's Claim Examined. A. Mathematical Judgments. B. Geometrical
Judgments. C. The Principles of Physics 219
64. D. The Principle of Causality and Metaphysics. Doctrines of Kant and
Hume 223
65. Scholastic Account of the Principle 225
66. Inadmissibility of Kant's Limitation of the Principle to the Domain of
Sense Experience 228
CHAPTER VIII.
Necessary Judgments: Scholastic Theory.
67. In Necessary and Universal Principles of the Ideal Order the Ground of
the Judicial Nexus is seen to be in the Objects as Conceived: Ob-
jective Evidence 232
68. Proofs of the Thesis 234
69. In Necessary Judgments the Character of the Apprehended Nexus is due
to a Property of the Thought-Objects or Concepts, viz. their Ab-
stractness 241
70. What can be Inferred from the Characteristics of Abstract Thought-
Objects or Essences? A Debatable Question .... 245
xiv
TABLE OF CONTENTS
PART III.
INTELLECTUAL KNOWLEDGE: CONCEPTION.
CHAPTER IX.
Origin and Validity of Concepts: Moderate Realism.
PAGE
71. Problem of the Origin of Concepts 250
72. Problem of the Validity of Concepts 253
73. The Process of Conception: Terms Defined 256
74. Analysis of Conception. Various Theories. Kant on Intuition . . 259
75. Scholastic Theory of Abstraction 262
76. Reality of Objects of Conception: Moderate Realism Explained . . 268
77. Generalization. Intellectual Apprehension of the Individual . . 279
78. Proofs of Moderate Realism 287
CHAPTER X.
Validity of Concepts: Extreme Realism.
79. Plato's Doctrine on Universals 292
80. Ontologism 298
81. Medieval Forms of Extreme Realism 300
CHAPTER XI.
Validity of Concepts: Nominalism.
82. The So-called Medieval Nominalism 312
83. Modern Nominalism: General Exposition and Criticism . . . . 315
84. The Sensist and Positivist Theory of "Abstraction" and "Generaliza-
tion" 319
85. Positivism as a Theory of Knowledge 324
CHAPTER XII.
Validity of Concepts: Conceptualism; Kant's Doctrine.
86. General View of Conceptualism 330
87. Conceptualism of Kant's Doctrine 331
88. If all Concepts Involve "A Priori" Syntheses, what Moves or Deter-
mines the Mind in Forming such Syntheses? 332
89. Kant's Vindication of Universal Concepts as "A Priori" Syntheses of
the Categories with a Manifold of Sense Intuitions .... 336
90. Kant's Account of the Transition from Individual to Universal in Cogni-
tion 338
91. General Criticism of Kant's Theory of Universal Concepts. A. The
Theory Fails to Account for the Facts 343
92. B. Conception is not an "A Priori" Synthesis whereby our Mental
Representations are made " Objective" and thus become Cognitions 352
93. The Concept of "Causal" or "Necessary" Succession of Events in
Physical Nature is, for instance, not made "Objective " by the Ap-
plication of an " A Priori" Mental Rule to "Mere Mental Repre-
sentations" 359
94. Retrospect. Psychological Grounds of Conceptualism .... 366
Index
371
INTRODUCTION.
I. EPISTEMOLOGY: ITS PLACE IN PHILOSOPHY.—While the
special or positive sciences explore each a limited portion of
human experience, philosophy explores the whole domain.
While they raise immediate questions and offer partial and proxi-
mate explanations, it raises ultimate problems and offers the
fullest explanations which the mind of man can discover. What
is the nature of man and the universe? What is their origin?
What is their destiny? What is the meaning of life? How
should man live? What can man know of these things? Of
how much can he be certain? What is knowledge itself? Is
any knowledge reliable? And if so, what are its limits and
conditions? These are some of the problems investigated in the
various departments of philosophy—Cosmology, Psychology,
Logic, Ethics, etc.
Assuming a division of Speculative Philosophy, or Meta-
physics, into General and Special—the former embracing On-
tology and Epistemology, the latter embracing Cosmology,
Psychology, and Natural Theology—a division which has been
set forth elsewhere1—we assign to Epistemology or the Theory
of Knowledge (eiriaT^fir), Xoyo?, doctrina scientiae sen cogni-
tionis) the philosophical investigation of human knowledge itself,
from the standpoint of the certitude, validity, or truth-value of
this knowledge.
Epistemology and Logic.—The relation of Epistemology to
Logic is thus apparent. Logic as a practical science brings to
light from an analysis of our thought processes certain norma-
tive principles which guide these processes towards the discovery
of truth. In doing so it makes a number of assumptions, as, for
instance, that by thinking correctly, i.e. by judging and reasoning
according to logical canons, the attainment of truth and certi-
tude is possible. All such assumptions it devolves on Epistemo- 1 Ontology, or The Theory of Being. P. Coffey, Ph.D. (Longman*, 1914),
Introd., pp. 14-23.
VOL. I. I
2 THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
logy to justify.1 But in fact the line of division between these
two branches of study has not been clearly recognized either in
theory or in practice: for all the problems claimed by Epistemo-
logy arise naturally out of the reflective analysis to which Logic
subjects our thought processes. Down to comparatively recent
times the practice among scholastic exponents of philosophy has
been to treat this group of questions under the title of Logica
Critica, or Critical Logic, in immediate connexion with Logica
Dialectica, the Logic of Inference and Scientific Method.*
Towards the end of the eighteenth century the influence of
Kant's Critical Philosophy gave an extraordinary impetus to the
study of problems concerning the scope and limitations of human
certitude. This influence was felt among the exponents of the
traditional "Philosophy of the Schools". It resulted in the
grouping of such problems into a definite department for fuller
exposition and treatment, and called forth special scholastic
treatises, of which MERCIER's Criteriologie Ge'ne'rale? and more
recently JEANNIERE'S Criteriologia? may be taken as typical.
The title Criteriology (Kpirrfpiov, \oyoc,—the science of the
criteria or tests, i.e. of true and certain knowledge) emphasizes
the special aim of the investigation as being an analysis of the
tests by the application of which to our knowledge and beliefs we
may be able to discern and sift out the true from the false; while
the title Epistemology ("Theory of Knowledge," Erkenntnis-
theorie, Erkenntnislehre) reminds us that the subject-matter of the
investigation is human knowledge.5 While, then, the aim of the
various human sciences, and of the other departments of philo-
sophy, is to extend our knowledge of the data of human experience,
the aim of this particular investigation is not exactly to extend
1 Cf. Science of Logic. P. Coffey, Ph.D. (Longmans, 1912), i., § 17, pp. 28-9.
5C/. Hickey, Summula Philosophiae Scholasticae (Dublin, Gill, 1912), vol. i.;
Reinstadler, Elementa Philosophiae Scholasticae (Herder, 1901), vol. i.
'Mercier's treatise, one of the many works from the pen of the illustrious
Belgian Cardinal when he was Director of the Philosophical Institute at the Catholic
University of Louvain, was published in 1899, and forms the fourth volume of the
Louvain Cours de Philosophic. Mainly on account of its searching analysis of
Kantism it gained a wide publicity, reaching its sixth edition in 1911.
* Criteriologia, vel Critica Cognitionis Certae. Auctore R. Jeanniere, S.J.
Paris, Beauchesne, 1912.
5 Not angelic or divine knowledge, or the knowledge of an imaginary abstract
pure intelligence, but such knowledge as may be attained by the minds of concrete
individual human beings. About the former kinds of knowledge we can know only
what we can infer by analogy from the knowledge of which we have direct experi-
ence, i.e. human knowledge. Cf. F. S. Turner, Knowledge, Belief, and Certitude
(London, 1900), p. 59.
INTRODUCTION
3
our knowledge but rather to perfect our acquired knowledge by
teaching us WHAT IT IS TO KNOW.
Our method, therefore, as in psychology, will be mainly intro-
spection, supplemented of course by external observation of the
cognitive experiences of the human race, and by rational infer-
ence from the internal and external data so observed.
Epistemology and Psychology.—If we understand by Psy-
chology, as a department of philosophy, the philosophical investi-
gation of the whole domain of living things, the highest branch
of its subject-matter will be the phenomena of the human mind,
and among these latter cognitive phenomena hold a prominent
place. On account of the naturally close connexion of problems
concerning the origin and development of knowledge with prob-
lems concerning its scope, validity, and significance, epistemo-
logy is closely allied with psychology.1 They have, however,
definitely distinct standpoints. The cognitive activities of the
mind, considered as facts, as mental events, belong to psycho-
logy; considered as apprehending truth they belong to episte-
mology. For while as mental events they arise and develop
according to laws of mental association and conjunction which it
is the duty of psychology to elucidate, they have another and
distinct aspect in that they claim to apprehend truth. It is pre-
cisely this claim which epistemology has to investigate.
Reflecting on our conscious life we easily distinguish between two orders
of movement and combination among our conscious states. We find things
occurring together in our mental life without any inner connexion, and recur-
ring together for no other reason than that they have occurred together. The
connexion of language with thought is a good example of this association of
mental states. The spoken or written word suggests a certain idea not be-
cause it has any internal connexion with the latter, but because they have
always occurred together in our experience. Memory depends on this sort of
grouping and reproduction of mental states. The states so connected might
conceivably not have been so connected. It is a de facto grouping accord-
ing to mental tendencies which psychology has to examine and analyse.
But there is another connexion of a different kind, not a de facto conjunction
but a connexion which is seen by our reason to be necessary and immutable.
1 Hence, apart from special treatises on the Theory of Knowledge, such as Father
Rickaby's volume in the Stonyhurst Philosophical Series (The First Principles of
Knowledge, by John Rickabv, S.J., 2nd edit., Longmans, 1901), much epistemo-
logical matter is to be found in such treatises as Father Maher's work on Psycho-
logy (Psychology, Empirical and Rational, by Michael Maher, S.J. Longmans,
ib9o, 6th edit., i910) in the same series. Mercier (op. cit., 5th edit.,§3)regardsthe
Theory of Knowledge as a specially important tributary or dependency of the domain
of Psychology.
1 *
4
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
Such, for instance, is the connexion between our concepts of the various pro-
perties of a triangle, or our concepts of whole and part, or our concepts of
ground and consequent, premisses and conclusion. Here the elements not
merely occur together de facto, they "belong together" so to speak ; they
are internally, i.e. rationally, logically connected. Now among the de facto
groupings and movements the mind is constantly seeking for those rational
groupings and movements whereby we interpret our cognitive processes and
discover their significance as embodying truth or knowledge of reality. It is
with connexions of this latter kind that epistemology is concerned.
Or, again, we might illustrate the distinction in this way. Psychology deals
with all conscious experiences as mental events. Some of these experiences
are nothing more than individual mental events in an individual mind, as, for
example, an impulse, an emotion, a feeling of pleasure or pain. That is, they
simply are what they are, and they report nothing beyond themselves. But
there are other conscious experiences which do report an object beyond and
independent of the individual mental event itself, which claim to represent a
something beyond themselves and common to all minds, a something which
they do not make but only discover as portion of the total system or order
which reveals itself more or less to all of us and which we call reality. This
is true of those conscious experiences which we describe as thought ox think-
ing, cognition or knowledge, knowing, in the stricter sense of these terms, i.e.
interpreting, judging, affirming or denying. Now it is with such conscious
experiences, as representative of reality, that epistemology deals. Indeed, this
very question,—how a judgment which is an individual event of an individual
mind can validly apprehend something beyond itself as real and true for all
minds,—is not the least of the mysteries which epistemology has to examine.
How thought can have this objective reference it may be difficult to under-
stand ; but to deny the fact—as some philosophers have attempted—is equi-
valently to distort and destroy the function of thought altogether.
Epistemology and Ontology.—We have referred to the division
of General Metaphysics into the Theory of Knowing (Episte-
mology) and the Theory of Being (Ontology). The aim of all
metaphysics is to arrive at, a rational and systematic comprehen-
sion of reality. From the nature of the case, this of course is an
ideal to which the finite mind of man can only approximate.
Again, while the understanding of reality, of real being, is the
ultimate aim of metaphysics, it is clear that this understanding
cannot be satisfactory without an investigation into the nature
of "knowing" itself. Thus the Theory of Being has for its
counterpart and condition the Theory of Knowing.
And since all knowing involves a knowing subject and a
known object the two lines of investigation deal with two aspects
of the same domain, this domain being the sum-total of human
experience, or reality as revealed in and through this experience.
Historically some systems of speculative philosophy might be
INTRODUCTION
5
roughly described as theories of knowing and others as theories
of being, according as the one or the other of these two lines of
investigation is found to predominate. Thus, while the systems
of Aristotle, the mediaeval Schoolmen, Spinoza, and Leibniz
are fundamentally theories of being, those of Plato, Descartes,
Locke, Hume, and Kant are pre-eminently theories of knowing.
The distinction, however, is not to be taken as absolute, for
neither line of investigation can be pursued without reference to
the other, though the two groups of problems are sufficiently
distinct to admit of separate treatment.
2. Bearing of Epistemology on Spontaneous Convic-
tions, on the Sciences, and on Religious Belief.—It is
primarily for the guidance of the beginner that the present
treatise is intended. It may be well, therefore, to set down here
a few practical considerations which will at once arouse his
interest and help to adjust his initial outlook.
In the first place what is true of the study of philosophy
generally—that it demands the effort of personal thought and
reflection from the individual learner, and is not to be achieved
by any mere passive and unreflecting assimilation of the teach-
ing of text-books or professors—is particularly true of the study
of Epistemology. At the same time many of its problems are
such that the youthful student finds it very difficult to regard
them as serious or to approach them seriously. When he sees
what appear to him to be self-evident truths or dictates of plain
common sense called into question by people whom he hears
dignified by the title of great philosophers, he is apt to lose
patience unless he be modest enough to accept the assurance
that there is really something to be said for such apparently ex-
travagant positions, and sincere enough to endeavour to enter
sympathetically into standpoints so novel and so completely at
variance with his own outlook. But while such an attitude is
necessary not merely for the understanding of these novel theories,
but even for an intelligent appreciation of the common-sense
standpoint and its difficulties, he must remember that it is quite
compatible with a robust faith in the soundness of this latter, nor
has he any need to be unduly alarmed about the competence of
the mind for truth by the spectacle of so many able minds missing
truth from the very outset.
Moreover, the really just and fully satisfactory solution of
some of the problems, when once they are raised, demands a
6
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
ripeness of thought and experience, a breadth and depth of out-
look on men and things, which the youthful student can scarcely
be expected to bring to bear upon them. However, an average
acquaintance with logic and scientific method, a general know-
ledge of psychology, a moderate familiarity with the main con-
clusions and theories of the physical and natural sciences, with
history, literature, and the arts, and with the great world-facts
of morality and religion—all these ordinary acquisitions will en-
able him to appreciate the importance of epistemological prob-
lems, and, what is better still, to weigh the evidences from all
sources perhaps more justly and impartially than many of those
more mature inquirers who happen to have lost the sense of due
proportion by long years devoted to some specialized study which
has made them experts in a particular domain. The specialist
is always exposed to the danger of overrating evidence from his
own department, of interpreting all reality in terms of its par-
ticular laws, of ignoring facts that do not fit in with these. The
history of philosophy is strewn with the wreckage of false philo-
sophical theories propounded by scientific or other specialists.
The mechanical, evolutionary, and agnostic philosophies based on
the physical sciences about the middle of the last century by
such men as Huxley, Spencer, Buchner, and Haeckel are cases in
point. The youthful student, approaching the study of Episte-
mology for the first time, will be free from such prejudices; but
he must learn to think out the problems for himself, to seek the
truth sincerely and for its own sake, to recognize that the human
mind has its limits, that there are many questions which it may
raise indeed but cannot adequately answer, while at the same
time it can discover and hold firmly to all the truths that are
requisite for the realization of the supreme purpose of man's
existence in the universe.
In the next place the student will appreciate the importance
of epistemological problems when he learns that upon their right
solution depends the value or the worthlessness of scientific truth.
We all spontaneously believe in the trustworthiness of our cog-
nitive faculties: that our senses reveal to us a real, material uni-
verse distinct from our minds; that by the use of our reason in
the physical, natural, human, and social sciences we can and do
discover a certain amount of "truth," of genuine "knowledge"
about the real existence and the real nature of the persons, things,
and happenings which constitute this universe; that what we
INTRODUCTION
7
call the necessary and universal truths brought to light in these
sciences are not mere subjective constructions of our own mental
processes, signifying nothing beyond themselves, but that on the
contrary they really do give us an insight into the nature of that
which they purport to reveal to us, namely, the real world; that
the concepts assumed not merely by ordinary thought but by
the thought of the scientist to be concepts representative of the
real world are indeed really such,— concepts of "number,"
"quantity," "space," "time," "cause," "effect," "action,"
"quality," "substance," "matter," "spirit," "good," "evil,"
"freedom," "purpose," "duty," "happiness," etc., etc.;—that
what are assumed by the plain man to be self-evident truths
underlying all knowledge, and what are assumed by the scientist
as principles or starting-points from which, and with the aid of
which, he proceeds to discover and establish "scientific truths,"
are really themselves " truths," i.e. valid information or items of
knowledge about the real world. Now all these spontaneous
beliefs of the plain man, of the scientist, and indeed of the philo-
sopher in other departments, must be examined and tested in
Epistemology. Every single department of human science and
investigation makes, in regard to the possibility and fact of certain
knowledge, many assumptions which it is not only legitimate but
even necessary to criticize. For when we come to reflect on it
we find that human cognition is a very complex process; that
we distinguish truth from error and have often fallen into the
latter; that if we have been deceived once and again we may per-
haps be victims of a wider and deeper deception than we dream
of in respect to much, or possibly all, of what we think we know. Again, the student will take a deeper interest in epistemo-
logical problems when he learns that nowadays it is in this do-
main rather than in the positive sciences, or in supernatural
theology, or in any other department of philosophy, he will en-
counter questions by the right or wrong solution of which all
faith in Christianity, or indeed in supernatural religion as such,
must stand or fall. The foundations of faith in the truth of
Christianity cannot be laid in the quicksands of a mind that is
swept by the withering winds of philosophical scepticism. The
Theism implied by Christianity can find no home in the mind
that is a prey to Agnosticism. Nor is belief in a Supreme Being,
distinct from the world, compatible with the acceptance of any
form of Monism. It is of the first importance for the catholic
8
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
student to realize that among all peoples who have inherited
Christian culture and civilization the choice of ever-increasing
multitudes of those whom we may describe as the leaders of
thought—and consequently also of the masses influenced by them
—is now no longer so much as formerly between Catholicism and
some other form of Christianity, but rather between Catholicism
and the rejection of supernatural religion altogether. Nowadays
the religious question in the main resolves itself into Catholicism
versus Unbelief, Agnosticism, Monism, Naturalism. The intel-
lectual difficulties which impede the acceptance of catholic truth
by the modern mind are not concerned with individual dogmas;
they lie deeper down; they refer to the possibility of Divine
Revelation, to the existence of a Supreme Being, to the binding
force of morality, to the very capacity of the human mind for
attaining to any certain knowledge about the origin, nature, and
destiny of man and the universe. These difficulties, arising out
of false theories of knowledge, enhance both the interest and the
importance of Epistemology for the catholic student.
At the same time our investigation, if it is to attain its object,
must be wholly impartial and disinterested. A treatise on the
Theory of Knowledge cannot possibly be apologetic or polemical
in the religious sense. It must be purely philosophical; it must
appeal to reason, not to authority; it must be grounded on
universal human experience; it must assume nothing except on
grounds of reason; in this sense it must be " presuppositionless ".
But only in this sense; for it will bring to light many presupposi-
tions without which no rational investigation and no intelligent
thought would be possible. The believer in the Christian re-
ligion may legitimately indeed entertain not only the expec-
tation, but even the unwavering confidence throughout, that a
purely rational investigation of the sources, scope, and limits of
human certitude, will, if rightly conducted, inevitably justify the
foundations of his faith and make of this a rationabile obsequium,
a reasonable service;1 but were he to attempt to construct a
theory of knowledge on the assumed truth of his religious beliefs,
the task attempted in thus " putting the cart before the horse"
would obviously be worse than useless.
3. Conspectus of Problems Raised by Reflective
THOUGHT.—All men have spontaneous and firm convictions
about many things. Prompted by nature itself they believe
1 Rom. xii. 1.
INTRODUCTION
9
that there is a distinction between truth and error; that they
can and do discover some truths. It is likewise the general ex-
perience of men to discover occasionally that they have been de-
ceived, that some of their firm convictions were not true but
false, were not " knowledge" but error,—for by the term " know-
ledge," used simply and without qualification, we understand
true knowledge and not merely seeming, spurious knowledge.
Nor is the ordinary man disconcerted by the discovery that time
and again he has been deceived, for he knows that man is not
infallible in the pursuit of truth. With wider experience he may
learn to exercise greater caution in regard to what he will accept
as certainly true, and he may be more easily disposed to admit
that even some of what he still holds for certain knowledge may
turn out after all to have been false; but none the less he will
continue to follow the inclination of his rational nature to hold
on firmly to each and every one of his spontaneous convictions
as long as he sees no reason for abandoning them. Thus, as he
passes through life he may retain his early "religious" convic-
tions—about God, the soul, a future life of rewards and punish-
ments, moral responsibility, etc.—if he ever had such; or it may
happen that he may modify them. If he be comparatively un-
educated, or prevented by material preoccupations from pursuing
the cultivation of his mind, it is not likely that he will ever
systematically examine and revise his beliefs, even those that
most intimately concern his own nature and destiny. And this
is the case with the masses of mankind.
But with those who have leisure to cultivate their minds by
the study of the arts and sciences, of literature and history, of
philosophy and religion, of human civilization in any of its varied
and manifold modes of expression; with those, too, on whom the
duty devolves of instructing, educating, enlightening their fellow-
men, the duty of promoting the intellectual, moral, and religious
progress of humanity,—the case is different. When we reflect on
the profoundly divergent and conflicting views that have at all
times divided humanity in regard to the very questions that con-
cern human destiny most intimately,—the existence and nature
of a Supreme Being, the reality of a future life, the origin and
binding force of moral principles, etc.,—we cannot help asking
ourselves whether after all the human mind is capable of attain-
ing to certitude about such matters. When we learn from the
history of human thought as exercised in its fullest intensity by
10
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
its ablest representatives and exponents on those and similar
fundamental questions,—in other words, from the history of philo-
sophy,—that many have questioned the power of the human mind
to know even if there exist a suprasensible world, we must per-
force examine the question: Can the human mind know for
certain whether there is any reality other than the material things
of time and space revealed in our sense experience? When from
an acquaintance with the various positive sciences which deal
with the material universe and with organic life we find no small
disagreement prevailing as to what are " established conclusions"
and what are merely "probable hypotheses" in these domains,
we are led naturally to inquire whether, if truth be at all attain-
able, there are any satisfactory tests whereby we can recognize it.
Moreover, we can see by a little reflection that not merely the
ordinary convictions of the plain man, but even the sciences
themselves,—even the abstract sciences, such as mathematics, no
less than the concrete, positive sciences,—assume as true certain
principles i which they do not prove, and assume thereby that the
notions embodied in theseprinciples are validly applicable to reality
and give us a genuine insight into reality. For by "science" we
certainly understand a genuine knowledge of reality, and if those
fundamental notions that enter into the sciences did not somehow
reveal reality to us the sciences would be no better than a vast array
of mental illusions. Not only so, but knowledge of whatsoever kind
would be an illusion, inasmuch as all knowledge is embodied in
judgments and all judgments involve notions and purport to inter-
pret reality for us by analysis, synthesis, and comparison of notions. We need not anticipate the illustrations that will be duly given
in the course of our inquiry. What we have here to observe is
this, that the principles and notions in question suggest an in-
vestigation of the rational grounds on which we accept them as
giving us genuine knowledge. In other words, the general prob-
lem presents itself of re-examining critically our spontaneous
convictions and beliefs with a view to determining whether, or
within what limits and under what conditions, we can have well-
grounded and certain knowledge about anything. And no sooner
do we attempt to enter on our task than we come to realize how
exceedingly complex is the simplest act of knowledge,—in its
sources, in its objects, in its processes, in its grounds and motives.
We find ourselves endowed with external sense faculties whereby we think
that we apprehend a real, material universe existing in space and time, dis-
INTRODUCTION
tl
tinct from and independent of, our own minds, and with which we think we
are brought into conscious or cognitive relation by means of our own living
human bodies. But does the individual human mind, or can it, really ap-
prehend anything beyond or distinct from itself? and if so, how? We have
the power of reflecting on whatever we become aware of, and on the mental
acts or processes involved in this awareness. Does this reflection bear out
our spontaneous conviction that our knowledge can and does reach beyond
the cognitive process, the mental state itself, and apprehend a reality distinct
from the latter? We have the power of interpreting the data, the contents,
of our acts and processes of sense cognition; we have the power of rational
or intellectual cognition, of judging these data and reasoning from them.
When we interpret them as giving us some insight into the existence and
nature of a real material universe, is our interpretation well-grounded? When
we infer from these data of sense experience the reality and existence of an
order of beings beyond the scope of sense knowledge and knowable only by
intellect or reason, the existence of a suprasensible order of realities, intelli-
gent, immaterial or spiritual, free and immortal, and the existence of a Su-
preme Personal Spirit, will the validity of such inferences stand the test of
the deliberate critical reflection to which reason can and must subject them?
The validity of all such inferences depends on the validity of the fundamental
rational principles and notions on which they rest, and of which they are
applications: are these principles and notions themselves valid? In other
words, do they give the individual mind an insight into any reality beyond
itself? Or will a critical analysis of them perhaps disclose them to be, for
aught we know, mere products of the cognitive activity of the individual
mind,—products which spontaneously and of their very nature refer us, no
doubt, to a supposed world of reality which they purport to represent, but
whose genuine representative character we can never rely on, or satisfac-
torily vindicate and justify?
Are any, therefore, of our spontaneous convictions rationally justifiable?
Are any of the objects attained by our knowledge real? Or, in other words, is
any of our knowledge true? Does knowledge attain to reality as it is, or is
reality so transformed in and through the very process of cognition itself that
reality can never be known by the mind as it really is in itself and apart from
the mind? Is knowledge a purely passive mirroring of reality? and if so
how is error possible? Or is the mind active in cognition? and if so can we
distinguish what it does, or contributes, to the total "known object," from
what is really there to be known antecedently to the actual cognition of it?
Truth is commonly understood to be the conformity of knowledge, or of
the mind knowing, with the reality known; and error to be the opposite re-
lation. And it is commonly assumed that we have the power of testing our
knowledge, and of discerning between genuine knowledge and misleading or
erroneous knowledge. But this seems to imply that we can grasp not merely
the mental or subjective term but also the extramental or objective or real
term of the knowledge-relation, in order to judge whether this relation is one
of conformity or not. But how can we grasp the extramental term otherwise
than by knowing it and thereby making it mental? What then is truth
at all?
All our knowledge,—nay, all our consciousness,—involves a duality, a
12
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
distinction between the subjective factor, the subject and act or process of
consciousness or cognition on the one hand, and the object, of which the
subject is made aware by this act or process, on the other hand. When we
reflect even upon the mere awareness which characterizes the most rudi-
mentary conscious feeling or sensation, we see that by describing it as con-
scious, as a conscious act or conscious state, we mean that there is an object
presented, however dimly, to a subject that becomes aware of it, however
vaguely. And such a sensation is not yet knowledge; for we have not
knowledge proper until we interpret or judge,—at least implicitly, as we
generally if not invariably do in sense perception,—until we interpret, until
we say, mentally, "this" or "that" "is" or "is not," or "is" or "is not"
"so-and-so". In external sense perception this duality of subject and object
is more clearly marked, as also in all judgments referring to the data of ex-
ternal sense experience. It is likewise present in our consciousness of our
own bodies, in our feelings of bodily pleasure or pain, etc., though here we
spontaneously believe in some sort of a unity or continuity of the object with
the subject: for here we are the knowing subjects and the bodies which are
the known objects are our bodies. Nay even when we make our minds, our
cognitive activities themselves, the objects of our contemplation, as we can
and do by introspective reflection, there is still the duality, the distinction be-
tween the mind as knowing subject and the mind as known object. What
bearing has this duality on the possibility of our discovering the nature of our
own selves and cognitive processes on the one hand, or of realities (other than
our own selves) as known objects on the other hand?
It is manifest that an examination of all those and many other similar
questions will involve an inquiry into the main sources of our knowledge, the
nature and modes of our cognitive processes, the characteristics of objectivity
and universality in the concepts and judgments formed by our individual
minds, and the ultimate grounds of our spontaneous belief that we can and
do attain to some certain knowledge concerning our own real nature and the
real nature of the universe in which we have our being.
4. Rise and Development of Theories of Knowledge:
Historical Outlines.—An analogy is sometimes drawn be-
tween the mental development of the individual and that of the
race. As the child is at first wholly preoccupied with external
objects, and only as its mental powers develop does it begin to
reflect, to look inward, and finally in adult years to puzzle over
the meaning, the reliability and the limits of its acquired know-
ledge and beliefs,—so the philosophical speculation of the race has
been at first concerned mainly with the external world (Cosmo-
logy), then with the nature of the knowing self or subject (Psycho-
logy), and finally with the meaning, scope, and value of knowledge
itself (Epistemology). In the main the analogy is true of certain
great epochs of philosophical inquiry: for instance, after the
earliest of the ancient Grecian thinkers had busied themselves
INTRODUCTION
with speculations on the nature of the cosmos, attention was
directed by Socrates, and by his contemporaries and successors,
to problems concerning the soul and the possibility of certain
knowledge. But the analogy is not true of the progress of philo-
sophical thought as a whole. The erroneous impression is some-
times conveyed by modern writers that the age of philosophical
criticism, first prepared by Descartes (1596-1650), only dawned
with Kant (1724-1804); that previously philosophers in the main
had naively and unreflectingly taken for granted as unquestion-
able a multitude of epistemological assumptions which post-
Kantian criticism has at all events fearlessly analysed. As a
matter of fact the critical analysis of knowledge is as old as philo-
sophy itself. In the fifth century before the Christian era the
Kantian Criticism had its forerunner in the Homo mensura omnium
of the Grecian sophist, Protagoras; and modern subjectivism had
its prototype in the scepticism of the Platonic academies. The
scholasticism of the Middle Ages,—which it has been so custom-
ary among modern advocates of untrammelled criticism to regard
as a system truly typical of naive dogmatism,—devoted its highest
efforts of thought for centuries to distinctively epistemological pro-
blems in its controversies on universal ideas, on individuation and
distinctions, and on the respective domains of reason and faith.
It is probably because, in contrast with much of modern thought,
those mediaeval investigations did not issue in widespread scep-
ticism and intellectual chaos, that their real value to philoso-
phy has been so commonly underrated. The conclusions they
reached were in harmony with the revealed truths of the Chris-
tian Religion; and this was enough to render them suspect to
the non-catholic mind, which, since the religious revolt of the
sixteenth century, has preferred to philosophize on purely in-
dividualistic lines, and without respect to the great world-fact of
Christianity in the religious experience of humanity. None the
less, the fruits of so many centuries of critical reflection on the
scope and limits of human knowledge and certitude cannot be
lightly ignored by the modern student of epistemology.
It is, however, undeniable that the philosophical criticism of
the last two centuries has prosecuted a very searching analysis of
the cognitive capacity of the human mind, that it has persistently
explored the motives of human certitude, that it has sounded
many depths and shoals in the ocean of human beliefs: a legiti-
mate and ven laudable enterprise, but grave and delicate, and
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
full of peril for the rash and incautious adventurer. That it has
been prosecuted wisely in the main during these few centuries,
that fruitful results have rewarded its labours, the actual chaotic
conditions of the intellectual world will scarcely permit even the
most sanguine to maintain. Indeed for Catholics its net result
seems to confirm their traditional teaching that it is morally
impossible for men generally, without the aid of Divine Revela-
tion, to hold fast to such a knowledge of truth as will preserve
them from grave intellectual error and consequent moral deca-
dence. However this may be, at anyrate the problems raised, the
doubts suggested, the subjectivism fostered, by the divers and
often bewildering speculations of modern philosophers in regard
to the scope and limits of human certitude, impose on the present-
day Catholic student of philosophy the serious task of equipping
himself with a sound Theory of Knowledge.
Such questions as those indicated in the preceding section
(3) have been repeatedly raised and discussed since the first
beginnings of philosophical speculation ; and the various "theories
of knowledge" that have marked its development through the
centuries are characterized by the various forms in which those
questions have been raised, and the various solutions they have
received. According to some of these theories the senses are the
only source of genuine knowledge, and the only knowable reality
is that which reveals itself through the senses, i.e. the material
universe. The supposed suprasensible world, which intellect
with its reasoning processes purports to reveal to us, is chimeri-
cal, or its reality at best problematical. Such theories of know-
ledge may be described as various forms of Sensualism, the
corresponding theories of reality being forms of Materialism.
According to others intellectual thought is the only source of
genuine knowledge: reality is only as thought conceives it and
not at all as the senses present it. Such theories may be re-
garded as forms of Intellectualism, the corresponding theories
of reality being forms of Idealism or Spiritualism. But it may
not be amiss to warn the student at the outset that all such
general descriptive titles of philosophical theories and systems
have been used, and are still used, in a variety of quite distinct
senses, so that he will always need to look to the context for
their exact meaning in each case. Another class of theories
arose, perhaps as a logical and natural outcome of the opposi-
tion between the two just mentioned, namely, sceptical theories,
INTRODUCTION
forms of Scepticism, i.e. of doubt about the existence of any
reliable source of knowledge, about the possibility of attaining to
any justifiable certitude whatsoever.
Other theories, again, have recognized both in the senses and
in the intellect reliable sources of knowledge; but differ in the
parts which they ascribe to each source, in their modes of effect-
ing a harmony between these sources, and of removing apparent
contradictions between their respective verdicts concerning the
ultimate nature of reality in so far as reality falls within human
experience. Such theories are generally described as dogmatic,
or as critical,—as Dogmatism, or as Criticism,—according as they
tend to accept certain fundamental principles or postulates under-
lying thought and sensation as ultimate, unquestionable, and
absolutely reliable, or endeavour to call even these into question
and subject them to further and more searching critical analysis.
Criticism pushed too far leads by excess to Scepticism.
Ancient Philosophy.—Some of these positions we find illustrated already
in the philosophy of ancient Greece. Thus, about the fifth century B.C. the
Eleatic philosophers (Parmenides and Zeno), failing to reconcile the mani-
foldness and changing character of reality as revealed through the senses
with the unity of being as conceived by abstract thought, rejected the testi-
mony of the senses as untrustworthy and held all reality to be one and im-
mutable, while the later lonians (represented by Heraclitus) arrived at
exactly the opposite conclusion that all reality consists essentially in change.
The earlier lonians had previously sought the fundamental and all-explaining
factor of the universe in a material principle such as earth or water or air,
while the Pythagoreans, impressed by the manifest order in the movements of
the heavenly bodies, the succession of the seasons, etc., a harmony which
makes the universe a cosmos, had sought to explain the latter by the aid of a
more abstract concept, proclaiming the essences of all things to be numbers
and numerical relations. The upshot of these conflicting theories was that
earliest form of philosophical scepticism propounded by the Sophists (Pro-
tagoras and Gorgias). Against their destructive tendencies Socrates
(469-399) vindicated the power of human reason to discover a solid ground-
work of truth as a basis for a right system of ethics. Plato (427-347)
unduly extolled the function of abstract intellectual thought and underrated
the testimony of the senses. Aristotle (384-322), profiting by the precious
fruits of the Socratic-Platonic teaching, successfully harmonized in his theory
of knowledge the respective contributions of senses and intellect. The ob-
jects of intellectual thought, which were for Plato realities transcending the
domain of sense experience, Aristotle proclaimed to be really immanent in
the data of the latter, thus ascribing both to sensation and to thought their
respective roles as reliable sources of genuine knowledge. From this high-
water mark in ancient Greek speculation the succeeding centuries witnessed a
speedy relapse into sensualism with Democritus, the Stoics and the Epicu-
reans, and into scepticism with Pyrrho and the later Platonic academies.
16
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
As the waning culture of Greece migrated to Rome the great world-fact
of the coming of Christ and the establishment of Christianity leavened all
human thought with a rich wealth of new and profoundly significant experi-
ences. Graeco-Roman speculation was fused with the tradition of Hebrew
culture and made to subserve the formation of a Christian world-view em-
bracing such conceptions as that of the Creation of all finite reality by One
Supreme, All-Perfect, Transcendent Spirit; the Redemption of mankind by
the Incarnation; the full Revelation to man of his supernatural origin and
destiny; the reasonableness of Faith in truths which, revealed by God to
man concerning his place and purpose in the universe, yet surpass the power
of human reason to comprehend or fathom fully. In the intellectual and
moral ferment of the early Christian centuries, in the struggle between the
conceptions embodied in the Christian religion and those that underlay the
natural religions and beliefs of Paganism, the human mind was forced to re-
consider the grounds of its deepest convictions concerning the great funda-
mental problems of philosophy and religion. While the Neo-Platonists
sought to oppose Christianity by a naturalistic system which largely substituted
for the pure intellectualism of Plato an affective mysticism permeated with
pantheism, the Fathers of the Church and after them the Medieval School-
men gradually evolved a theory of knowledge and reality which, while har-
monizing with the doctrines of the Christian religion, borrowed considerably
from Plato, particularly through St. Augustine (354-430), but was moulded
mainly by the philosophical teachings of Aristotle.
Mediczval Philosophy.—The two main problems of epistemology which
occupied the Mediaeval Schoolmen from the days of the Carlovingian revival
of learning with Alcuin (735-804), ScOTUS ERIUGENA (c. 815-80), and ST.
Anselm (1033-1109), to the golden age of Scholasticism in the thirteenth
century with St. Bonaventure (1221-74), Albertus Magnus (1193-1280),
Duns Scotus (1266-1308), and St. Thomas Aquinas (1224-74)—were the
harmonizing of the respective functions of senses and intellect in the genesis
of natural knowledge, and the harmonizing of the latter in its entirety with
supernatural faith in divinely revealed truth. The former of these two prob-
lems was discussed in the copious mediaeval controversies concerning the
validity and import of universal ideas,—reaching in the thirteenth century
what was for the time a definitive solution on the lines laid down by Aristotle.
The latter was likewise settled by the doctrine so fully and clearly formu-
lated by Aquinas concerning the power of the human mind to establish the
existence of God and the fact of Revelation aspreambula fidei, and the reason-
ableness of believing all revealed truths, including mysteries, on the authority
of God revealing.
But just as an interval of decadence and retrogression succeeded the cul-
mination of Greek philosophy in the fourth century B.C., so the culmination of
Scholasticism in the thirteenth century of the Christian era was succeeded by the
intellectual and religious chaos which marked the revolutions known as the
Renaissance and the Reformation. Down through the Middle Ages the con-
tents of the Christian Revelation, authoritatively propounded to mankind by the
Divine teaching prerogative claimed and exercised by the Catholic Church,
had been universally accepted as in harmony with the dictates of human reason
and the needs of human nature: whole nations now rejected the Church's claim
INTRODUCTION
«7
to that prerogative, and claiming for themselves the privilege of individual
private judgment went their own divergent ways, selecting divers fragments
of Christianity and classical Paganism wherewith to form religious systems
after their own hearts. Similarly in regard to natural knowledge few thinkers
of any note during the Middle Ages had ever seriously questioned the trust-
worthiness either of senses or of intellect, or doubted the capacity of the human
mind to reach certitude regarding the questions of deepest import to
humanity: now, however, the abandonment of the Aristotelian-Scholastic
teaching in regard to the co-operation of senses and intellect in the genesis
of true and certain knowledge led to a manifold recrudescence of Sensualism
and Scepticism.
Modern Philosophy.—This marks the transition to modern philosophy,
whose first notable representative, Descartes (i 596-1650), did much towards
concentrating all subsequent philosophical speculation explicitly on the problem
of the possibility and limits of human certitude. Not that this general problem
had not been already discussed for centuries ; it had been repeatedly discussed,
not however ex professo, but inasmuch as it inevitably entered into ontological
problems concerning the nature of reality itself which was assumed to be the
object of knowledge. But Descartes' method of starting in search of certitude
by making a clean sweep of all philosophical tradition, trying to assume abso-
lutely nothing, and laying down as the basis of all knowledge his own con-
sciousness that he was doubting everything,—this method and its consequences
pushed the problem of knowledge, the critical problem, to the forefront of
philosophical speculation, and led to the development of epistemology as a
distinct and substantive department of philosophy.
Starting from the fact of self-consciousness Descartes developed a form of
intellectualism which, while depreciating unduly the role of the senses, issued
in an irreconcilable dualism of spirit and matter. With his disciples, Geulincx
(1625-69) and Malebranche (1638-1715), this passed over into Occasional-
ism, with Spinoza (1632-77) into Pantheism, and with Leibniz (1646-1716)
into a sort of pan-psychism known as Monadism. Malebranche's theory of
knowledge turned on the contention that the human mind has its knowledge
not from the senses but from an intuitive intellectual vision of truth in the
Divine Mind; Spinoza likewise regarded not the senses but only intellectual
intuition and reasoning as the source of genuine knowledge; while Leibniz
taught that the perceptions of sense and the conceptions of reason are innate
and derive their validity from a harmony pre-established between them and
their objects by God.
Alongside this continental current of extreme intellectualism there de-
veloped in England a very strong and influential current of sensualism. The
rapid development of the sciences of observation and experiment from the
sixteenth century onward had shifted the interest of scholars from the apparently
barren occupation of the intellect in deductive reasoning to the more promis-
ing occupation of the senses in observing and experimenting in the domain of
external nature. LORD Bacon (1561 -1626) had already called attention to the
importance of thus "interrogating " nature instead of " anticipating " nature
by futile a priori speculations, and John HOBBES (1588-1679) had already
revived in substance the sensualism of the school of Democritus, when John
Locke (1632-1704) in his Essay Concerning the Human Understanding laid
vol. 1. 2
i8
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
the foundations of modern English sensualism by so analysing the sources
and processes of knowledge as to raise serious doubts about its scope and
validity. Intellectual processes were misinterpreted and partly confounded
with those of the senses and imagination, and all knowledge was apparently
reduced to a knowledge of mental states. The attempt to evolve a knowledge
of extramental reality from this subjective awareness was so unsuccessful that
with Locke's immediate disciples, Berkeley (1685-1753) and Hume (1711-
1776), the supposed barrier against the power of the mind to transcend itself
in knowledge appeared only to become more and more insuperable. The
former argued from Locke's principles that the universe perceived by our
senses and supposed to be a world of material substances can be only a system
of perceived objects, i.e. of immaterial ideas which have no existence other
than their mental existence,—their esse being percipi,—and which derive this
mental existence from God, the Supreme Spirit, who places them in the created
spirits which we call our minds. The latter pushed Locke's principles so far
as to argue that not merely can we know nothing of material substances, but
that we cannot know anything even of spiritual substances: all knowledge is
reduced to a mere consciousness of a flow of transient states of the individual
mind. This current of sensualism, which reached its reductio ad absurdum
in the nihilistic scepticism of Hume, is variously described as Empiricism
owing to its exaggeration of the function of sense experience in knowledge and
its attempted reduction of all thought to sense processes; as Idealism or
Phenomenism owing to its reduction of all knowledge to knowledge of mental
states, impressions, ideas, or appearances; and as Subjectivism on account of
its implied or expressed denial of any power in the knowing subject to trans-
cend itself in the process of cognition and so attain to any knowledge of ex-
tramental reality. The logical issue of subjectivism is the absurd conclusion
known as Solipsism, i.e. the fancy that the individual conscious mind is the
sole existing reality, the whole universe being a sort of self-evolved panorama
passing within it. An alternative to this absurd conclusion is, however, the
metaphysical theory of Idealistic Monism according to which individual finite
minds are but transient centres of partial self-consciousness in the eternal
evolution of the one sole reality which is at once Subject and Object, or Mind
and Nature. Notwithstanding the suicidal destructiveness of Hume's philo-
sophy, phenomenism was still widely prevalent among English philosophers
in the last century, finding typical exponents of its principles in such writers
as John Stuart Mill (1806-73), Huxley (1825-95), Bain (1818-1903), and
Spencer (1820-1903). Under the title of Positivism (Comte, 1798-1857) it
proclaimed the validity of the positive sciences as embodying knowledge of
the time and space relations of co-existence and sequence among the data
which constitute the domain of sense experience ; while on its negative side it
denied, under the title of Agnosticism, the validity of metaphysical knowledge,
i.e. knowledge of any domain of reality beyond that of sense experience.
Towards the end of the eighteenth century the German philosopher,
Immanuel Kant (1724-1804),—aroused from the "dogmatic slumber" in
which he had accepted the intellectualism of Leibniz and Wolff (1679-1754),
by coming into contact with the thorough-going scepticism of Hume,—under-
took the ambitious task of finding a via media between intellectualist dogma-
tism on the one side and sensualist scepticism on the other. He sought this
INTRODUCTION
19
via media by what he called the Transcendental Criticism of the mind's
faculties of knowledge. In the spirit of Descartes he proclaimed the necessity
of instituting a critical analysis of the mind, antecedently to all metaphysical
investigation of man and the universe, with a view to discovering the scope
and limitations of man's faculties of knowledge, and the conditions under
which these faculties can attain to such knowledge as they are capable of
reaching. The results of his life-long investigations were given to the world
mainly in his three Critiques, the Critique of Pure Reason, the Critique of
Practical Reason, and the Critique of fudgment. Praiseworthy in their pur-
pose, but in their main drift misleading, they have exercised a profound, but
on the whole an unhealthy and mischievous, influence on subsequent specu-
lation. They reach the general conclusion that the human intellect, speculat-
ing reflectively on the data of sense experience, is confined to a knowledge of
mental appearances or phenomena, and can attain to no knowledge of extra-
subjective or extramental reality; but that by a consideration of the practical
or moral dictates of our conscience each of us can attain to subjective, personal
certitude or conviction in regard to the principles of morals and religion,—the
existence of God, the immortality of the soul, and the reality of human freedom
and moral responsibility. Thus in effect he splits the human mind into two
isolated compartments, and tries to reconcile speculative scepticism with
moral dogmatism.
To his moral dogmatism may be traced the unfortunate anti-intellectualist
tendency of modern thought to base all certitude concerning the principles
which underlie religion and morality on the individual will and its aspirations,
the individual feelings and emotions, the affective tendencies and activities of
the individual mind. Thus, Voluntarism (Renan, Nietzsche), Sentimental-
ism (Jacobi, 1743-1819), and in our own days Pragmatism (C. S. Pierce,
W. James, G. Simnel, F. C. Schiller, etc.) have been propounded by
those who while adhering to Kant's critical standpoint, and accepting his
doctrine on the phenomenism of all speculative knowledge, display the same
anxiety as he did to avoid the logical issue of a paralysing scepticism. At
the same time the subjectivism reached by his defective analysis of specula-
tive knowledge has sown in modern philosophy a deep distrust in the capacity
of man to arrive by way of intellect at a valid knowledge of reality.
Hence we have multitudes of those modern writers who cultivate what
we may call the philosophy of the sciences, proclaiming that even these
elaborate systems, built up as they have been by intellectual interpretation
of experience, give us no true insight into the nature of reality: their laws
do not mirror or represent reality, but are only regulative principles whereby
we systematize the contents of the subjective domain of our mental experience.
This tendency is manifest in the writings of such men as Helmholtz, Hertz,
Mach, Poincare, Le Roy, etc.
Another manifestation of this sceptical attitude towards the power of the
intellect may be recognized in the widely prevalent actual tendency to depre-
ciate the value of a logical use of the intellect, to deny all validity or truth-
value to the abstract intellectual concept and treat it as a mere symbol, to
belittle the function of discursive reasoning by means of such concepts, to
proclaim that not that way lies the road to real knowledge, but only by way
of an alleged direct and immediate mental intuition which would bring the
2 *
20
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
conscious subject into living contact with the real. Abstract thought presents
its object as one, inert, static, lifeless, etc. But reality is manifold, dynamic,
vital, moving, etc. ; it is a process; and only by direct conscious intuition can
it be grasped as such. This attitude, already traceable in the writings of the
pragmatists (cf. Dewey, Smith, Brewster, Wells, Papini, etc.) finds its
fullest development in the works of BERGSON,—who is par excellence the
philosopher most in fashion at the present time. It is the old problem which
divided the Eleatics and the later Ionians, and in Bergson we rightly recog-
nize the modern Heraclitus.
Reverting again for a moment to Kant's philosophy we observe that the
more notable of his immediate disciples, abandoning his critical standpoint,
developed what was for him a theory of knowledge into a theory of reality.
Thus FlCHTE (1762-1814) and Schelling (1775-1854) constructed from
Kant's conclusions metaphysical systems of idealistic monism; while HEGEL (1770-1831), whose influence has rivalled that of Kant himself, constructed on
the lines of a purely intellectualist dialectic a monistic system in which he
identifies the logical with the ontological, subject with object, spirit or mind
with matter or nature, and represents the Sole Reality as a dialectically self-
evolving Thought or Idea. While SCHOPENHAUER (1788-1860) opposed to
this Hegelian monism a voluntarist monism in which Reality is conceived as
Will, some of the immediate disciples of Hegel, such as Feuerbach (1804-72)
and Strauss (1808-74), gave it an interpretation which issued in absolute
materialism. Thus the most ambitious efforts of German speculation to
sound all the depths of Being with the plummet of the finite human mind, its
implied claim to clear up all mystery by comprehension of the Infinite, and
its equivalent deification of the creature, were speedily overtaken by the
nemesis of pride in a precipitous descent to the ignoble depths of the brute
philosophy.
Not all modern thought was, however, so deeply affected by subjectivism
as the various currents just indicated. A truer appreciation of the relations
between senses and intellect, and between reason and faith, was retained by
many during the intellectual and religious revolutions which had ushered in
modern philosophy. At the same time the enervating influence of the Carte-
sian and Kantian theories of knowledge weakened in some quarters that
healthy and robust confidence in the powers of the mind which had char-
acterized the traditional Aristotelian philosophy as expounded in the Catholic
schools. For this philosophy the certitude of knowledge is ultimately
grounded in the native capacity of the human intellect to reach a genuine
knowledge of reality by reasoning carefully from the data of sense experience
in the light of objective evidence. Dissatisfied with this position some now
sought to claim for the human mind an immediate intuition of reality in the
Divine Mind as the only guarantee of the real validity of knowledge. This
tendency found varied expressions in the Theosophy of Oetinger (1702-82)
and Baader (1765-1841) in Germany, and in the Ontologism of Rosmini
(1797-1855) and Gioberti (1801-52) in Italy. Others sought to supplement
the supposed native incapacity of the mind by appealing to the necessity of
a Divine Revelation as the ultimate ground of human certitude, a theory
which found its formulation in the Fideism of Huet (1630-1721) and Bautain
(1796-1867) in France, and in the Traditionalism of De Bonald (1754-1840),
INTRODUCTION
21
DE LAMENNAIS (1782-1854), BONNETTY (1798-1879), VENTURA (1792-
1861), and Ubaghs (1800-75), m France, Italy, and Belgium.
In the main, however, the traditional Aristotelian and scholastic theory
of knowledge found uninterrupted acceptance and support in Catholic centres
of thought throughout the modern period. After the first shock of the six-
teenth century revolutions it gained a remarkably brilliant series of advocates
and exponents in the Catholic schools of Southern Europe, and especially
of Spain. In this revival movement the most notable names are those of
Cajetan (1468-1534), Sylvester (1474-1528), Suarez (i548-1617), and
John of St. Thomas (1589-1644).
Another and perhaps a more remarkable revival, or rather what is at
once a revival, an adaptation, an amplification and development, of this tra-
ditional philosophy has taken place in our own days. The modern mind
was prepared for it partly by the historical research of the last century,1 which
has dispelled so many prejudices concerning the Middle Ages, and partly
by the intellectual unrest and discontent evoked by the modern chaos of
ephemeral philosophical theories. It is characterized on the one hand by a
more earnest study of mediaeval scholasticism, especially as expounded in the
works of St. Thomas Aquinas and the other great masters of the thirteenth
century, and on the other hand by a thorough-going critical analysis of its
principles both by comparison with other current theories of knowledge and
reality, and by application to the achieved results of modern science and re-
search in every department of human experience. It is in the spirit of this
present-day scholasticism that problems are dealt with in this treatise.
The student will understand, of course, that the bald historical outlines
in which we have just touched upon various theories of knowledge leave many
theories unmentioned altogether, and have been set down merely with a view
to acquainting the beginner with the general historical setting of the many
questions to be investigated. About the modern scholastic movement just re-
ferred to it will suffice to say here that it had its origin in the seventies of the
last century, during the pontificate of Leo XIII, and in no small measure
owing to his enlightened and authoritative advocacy. While earnestly es-
poused in all Catholic schools, its two leading centres have been Rome and
Louvain. Through the writings of the Louvain school, many of which have
passed into English, German, Spanish, and Italian, its influence has been ap-
preciably felt in not a few non-catholic and non-scholastic centres of thought.2
Besides Mercier's Criteriologie generate, his Logique, Ontologie, and Psy-
chologic (in the larger Louvain Cours dephilosophic) may be consulted with
profit, as also his Origines de la psychologie contemporaine. Among the lead-
ing exponents of the new scholasticism we may mention also: in Italy,
Liberators, Sanseverino, Signoriello, Cornoldi, Tongiokgi, Pal-
1 For historical research into mediaeval philosophy, cf. the valuable collection
consisting of some twelve volumes edited by Baeumker and Von Herthing, Beit-
raege zur Geschichte der Philosophic des Mittelalters; the works of Mandonnet,
Ehrlk, and Denifle ; and the Louvain collection Lcs Philosophes Beiges, edited by
Db Wulf and Pelzer.
» For a fully documented account of the Neo-Scholastic Movement, cf. Perrier,
The Revival of Scholastic Philosophy (New York, r9o9); also De Wulf, Scholas-
ticism Old and New (2nd edit., Dublin, Gill, i9io).
22
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
mieri, Zigliara, Lepidi,1 Schiffini and De Maria ;—in Spain, Balmes,
Gonzalez, Urraburu ;—in Germany, Kleutgen,* Stoeckl, Von Her-
thing, Pesch, Baeumker, Werner, Kaufmann, Grabmann, Gutberlet,
Schmidt ; '—in France, Peillaube, Sertillanges, Rousellot,4 Gardeil,
Mandonnet, Piat, Farges, Domet de Vorges, Tonquedec ;—in Eng-
land, Harper, W. G. Ward, Maher, Rickaby, and the other writers of the
Stony hurst Philosophical Series ;—in Belgium, the Louvain school, including
Mercier, Nys, Thiery, Deploige, De Wulf, Noel, Sentroul, Van
Weddingen, Halleux, Fontaine, Janssens; also De San, De Mun-
nynck, Lahousse, etc., etc
5. Epistemology not an Introduction to Metaphysics
but a Department of Metaphysics.—The historical outlines
given above will have revealed the fact that since the time of
Descartes the notion has been widely entertained that a critical
investigation of the mind's capacity to reach certain knowledge
ought properly to precede any attempt to investigate any of the
fundamental problems of philosophy, that only when we have
first discovered the scope and limits of this capacity are we in a
position to carry on metaphysical research. Nay more, Kant is
said even to have urged that we must bring this critical analysis
to bear on the mind's cognitive faculties themselves without tak-
ing into account the spontaneous working of these faculties or
building in any way on the experienced results of our spontaneous
cognitive activities ; that looking at the mind itself,—irrespectively
of anything that it spontaneously thinks, judges, or believes,—the
general question we have to ask and try to answer is the question
whether, or how far, within what limits and under what conditions,
can such a mind have knowledge. Such is the sort of criticism
which Kant is said to have called " transcendental " and to have
himself undertaken. This standpoint is not easily intelligible;
nor is it easy to see how the real, as distinct from the merely os-
tensible, adoption of such a standpoint could render a single step
of investigation possible,—in other words, how it would be possible
for us to investigate knowledge, which is at any rate an activity
of the mind (or its faculties) by attempting to examine the mind
(or its faculties) apartfrom all activities of the latter. For in what
other way can we hope to discover anything about knowledge,
about its scope and limits, about the conditions of its validity,
unless by examining the mind and its faculties as revealed in its
cognitive activities?
1 Delia conoscenta inttllettuale.
* Author of Die Philosophit der Vorzeit; French tr., La philosophit scolastique.
'Erkenntnislehre, 2 vols., Freiburg im Br., 1890.
4 L'intelltctualism* de Saint Thomas, Paris, 1908.
INTRODUCTION
23
Furthermore, it does not seem necessary to institute such an
analysis antecedently to all other philosophical investigations.
Just as a man's spontaneous reasonings can be correct without
his having previously learned from the science of logic the canons
to which they must have conformed, so can he by his spontaneous
convictions have attained to true and certain knowledge without
his having previously assured himself from the science of epistem-
ology that he was not misled by those convictions. As a matter
of fact all men can and do acquire a more or less extensive stock
of truth before ever adverting to the desirability or necessity of
examining explicitly their capability to attain to any truth; and
most men never trouble themselves to raise such a question at
all. Moreover, as we have seen already, it is only gradually and
from a deeper study of scientific, philosophical, and religious
questions, that the various problems arise with which epistemology
has to deal. The aim of this sort of investigation, therefore, is
not to prepare the way for metaphysical investigation, but rather
to complete and consolidate this latter. Its problems are not
problems which must be solved as an antecedent condition to the
attainment of truth about any other matter. Hence epistem-
ology is not a preparatory or introductory study which must pre-
cede metaphysics and make the latter possible; it is a department
of metaphysics, and not the first in order either.
Of course the reason for the post-Cartesian and post-Kantian
view is not far to seek. In order that the mind discover truth
with certitude it must \be capable of doing so. Is anything else
necessary? Is it necessary also that the mind be convinced of its
own capability? Here we must distinguish. It does indeed
seem necessary that the mind be aware of its own capability,
that it have a natural and spontaneous conviction of its capability,
not perhaps explicitly and as a result of reflection on the matter,
but that an implicit, concomitant belief in its own capability must
accompany all its cognitive activities: for no knowledge of truth,
no conviction of knowledge certainly attained, would be compat-
ible with a serious doubt on the part of the mind regarding its
capacity to reach truth. This spontaneous belief in the general
trustworthiness of his cognitive faculties is, however, a natural
endowment of every man; it is a condition which does not re-
sult from, but precedes, all epistemological investigation.
But is it further necessary,—in order that the mind discover
any truth with certitude,—not only that it be, and spontaneously
*4
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
believe itself to be, capable of so doing, but also that it should
have by deliberate reflection and exprofesso called this spontane-
ous belief into question, and examined critically whether or not
the grounds for this spontaneous belief are really sufficient? No;
such an investigation is not a prerequisite condition for the
certain possession of truth: provided that sufficient grounds for
the spontaneous belief are really there we can reach truth without
having ex professo examined into their sufficiency. Of course
when we do deliberately institute a critical inquiry into the whole
question of the sufficiency of the grounds for our spontaneous
convictions,—an inquiry involving an analysis of the sources and
processes of knowledge, etc.,—and when by such inquiry we
satisfy ourselves that although we are not infallible and have
sometimes fallen into error, and although our minds are not
infinite and must therefore remain ignorant of many things, still
we are really capable of reaching some truth and our spontaneous
knowledge was in the main genuine,—when we have done all this
we naturally thereby strengthen and confirm our spontaneous
convictions. But this does not imply that they were not already
convictions whereby we attained to true and genuine knowledge,
or that the critical investigations undertaken in Epistemology must
precede the acquisition of genuine certitude about anything.
Nevertheless, the method of doubt employed by Descartes, and
the method of transcendental criticism employed by Kant, seem
to imply that a critical inquiry into the possibility of knowledge
and certitude in general should precede the employment of our cognitive faculties to reach a reasoned solution of any funda-
mental or philosophical problem whatsoever. The one purports
to start from an attempted universal doubt, the other to conduct
the inquiry without any appeal to experience; and both alike
seem to imply that the mind can have no genuine certitude or
real knowledge, at least about fundamental or philosophical
problems, until it has first prosecuted to a successful issue the
preliminary question as to whether it is at all capable of attaining
to a certain solution of such problems. In connexion with these
methods we shall see whether such a preliminary and presup-
positionless theory of knowledge is at all possible. From what
has been just said the student will be able to conclude that
Epistemology is a department of metaphysics rather than an in-
troduction to metaphysics, and this is the only point with which
we are just now concerned.
PART I. THE NATURE OF THE INQUIRY.
CHAPTER I. the terms and data of the inquiry.
6. Cognition. Knowledge. Science. Belief. Faith.—
By cognition (L. cognitio) we mean simply the act or process of
knowing. By knowledge we mean the result of this process, or
sometimes—according to the context—the process of cognition
itself. It is usually taken as a collective term: the collection of
accumulated results of our cognitive activities. Sometimes, how-
ever, we find authors speaking of a knowledge, and knowledges in
the plural,—meaning an individual cognition or its result, and a
number of these, respectively. We may notice here that knowing,
cognition, knowledge, is suigeneris, that therefore'it cannot pro-
perly speaking be defined, or explained in terms of anything other
than itself.1 It is of course a complex process which admits of
analysis, examination, description, illustration; but we must be
always careful to remember that the terms of our descriptions
and illustrations are only metaphors and analogies, and may
therefore easily mislead instead of aiding us if we take them as
conveying to us anything better known to us than knowledge
itself. Nothing is more intimate to us than knowing. Hence
there is no necessity for defining it even if we could; but we
cannot. No doubt, we may say that cognition is a process, an
activity; and so it is; but this is not a definition, for if " activity"
is the genus, what is the differentia specified? Cognition only bears
1" The very question, ' What does the process of knowing consist in?' at least
suggests that knowing can be resolved into and stated in terms of something else
. . . that it is possible to elucidate the nature of knowledge by means of something
other than itself. Knowledge is sui generis and therefore a 'theory' of it is im-
possible. Knowledge is simply knowledge, and any attempt to state it in terms
of something else must end in describing something which is not knowledge."—
Prichard, Kant's Theory of Knowledge, pp. 238-45.
*5
26 THE OR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
an analogy to other forms of activity; and no other form of activity
is more intimate to us than that of knowing. Moreover, we con-
trast "knowing" with "doing," and still more with "making".
There is no more familiar distinction than that between " thought"
and "action "; and thought1 is a form of knowing. No doubt
the mind is active in knowing; all cognition is an immanent
mental activity, and has as result a mental state or condition—
which we call knowledge. But all knowledge must be knowledge
of something, and what we have here to observe is that know-
ledge as such does not make this "something". At least the
common-sense view of knowledge is that it is not a producing,
creating, or making of something, but a revealing or discovery of
something. Just as volition or willing is an immanent mental
activity which produces the mental state or condition of decision,
determination, resolution, etc., so cognition or knowing produces
the mental acquirement we call knowledge, but it does not pro-
duce the object of the knowledge, the thing known. It is not
a production but a discovery of this latter;5 but then, again,
such terms as "discovery," "revelation," "manifestation," "re-
presentation," etc., employed in describing knowledge, are no
whit simpler or more familiar to us than the term "knowledge,"
or "cognition" itself.
The term science conveys the notion of knowledge in some
way perfected. "Scientific knowledge" (L. scientia, cognitio
scientificd) is contrasted with "ordinary knowledge" (L. cognitio
vulgaris), as knowledge systematized, thought over, reduced to
order, in contrast with the scrappy, unassorted, promiscuous
knowledge possessed by the uneducated masses (the vulgus) or
1 The terms "thought" and "thinking" signify properly the higher or intel-
lectual processes of knowledge, such as conception of ideas, judgment, and reason-
ing, as distinguished from the operations of the senses and imagination.
* We are here concerned only with setting down the currently accepted meaning
of terms. We shall examine in due course attempts to show that knowledge is
something like what this " construction " theory would make it. It is in criticism of
such an attempt, on the part of Kant, that Prichard (op. cit., p. 118—cf. also ibid., pp.
235-6) has the following: 'Knowledge unconditionally presupposes that the reality
known exists independently of the knowledge of it, and that we know it as it exists
in this independence. It is simply impossible to think that any reality depends upon
our knowledge of it, or upon any knowledge of it. If there is to be knowledge, there
must first be something to be known. In other words, knowledge is essentially dis-
covery, or the finding of what already is. If a reality could only be or come to be
in virtue of some activity or process on the part of the mind, that activity or process
would not be " knowing," but " making" or "creating," and to make and to kjiow
must in the end be admitted to be mutually exclusive.'
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY 27
common folk).1 When knowledge is thus systematized it forms
what are called " the sciences ".
On these distinctions we have to observe two things. Firstly,
scientific knowledge is in its processes and objects continuous
with ordinary knowledge; it is a development of the latter,
attained by the same human minds using the same faculties on
the same subject-matter as in ordinary knowledge. To conceive
science as something wholly apart and removed from ordinary
knowledge would be a mistaken and unjustifiable view. Secondly,
when we think of " the sciences " as distinct bodies of truth or
knowledge, the distinction is a mental one, due to the mind's
power of abstracting; and hence we must guard against con-
ceiving the sciences as "existing" separately from one another
or apart from human minds. There is and can be no " science,"
just as there is and can be no "knowledge," except in individual
human minds. The sciences do not exist even in books: what
exists in books is a system of visible symbols of oral language,—
which latter is the expression of thought or knowledge. But
thought or knowledge exists only in the mind: and not in any
common, general, or universal " mind " or "subject" whose sole
function should be conceived as cognition,—for this too is only
an abstraction,—but in the minds of individual men, each of
whom not merely "knows," but also lives, feels, wills, believes,
hopes, acts, and has all the manifold conscious states and
activities which constitute human experience.
Belief is commonly distinguished from and sometimes con-
trasted with knowledge, but this is because the term has a
variety of meanings. To believe in its primary meaning is to
accept something as true on the word or authority of another.
One of the main sources of our knowledge is the authority of our
fellow-men. People do not generally realize—because it needs
a little reflection to realize—what a vast proportion of our know-
ledge comes to each of us individually through this source.
Through it each of us has all his knowledge of the facts of
history, most of his knowledge of the facts of geography, all his
knowledge of what is actually going on in the world outside the
very limited corner that falls under his own personal notice.
People who decry "religious knowledge " because it is accepted
1 For other and kindred implications of the term—" knowledge of a thing
through its causes," "knowledge reached by demonstration," etc.—see below,
S '3, P- 54; Science of Logic, ii.,§§ 251-4.
28
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
on authority seem to forget that nine-tenths of the human race
accept "scientific knowledge " only on authority, and that of the
other tenth, the scientists themselves, each accepts nine-tenths of
his scientific knowledge on the authority of his fellow-scientists
and without exploring or verifying it for himself,—inasmuch as
ten lifetimes, not to speak of one lifetime, would be too short to
carry out such verification. Now knowledge accepted on author-
ity is belief. In this sense of the term, therefore, belief is a
department of knowledge. When we believe a person's state-
ment we believe the person himself. This means that we know
for certain his authority is reliable; and when we know this we
know that what he tells us is true. Of course if we do not
happen to know for certain that his authority for what he tells us
is reliable we cannot know for certain that what he tells us is
true. We cannot give to it the certain assent which will make it
for us knowledge in the strict sense, i.e. certain possession of the
truth.
All knowledge proper is embodied in judgments. To assent
to a judgment is to accept it and commit ourselves to it as true.
When we do so we accept implicitly the grounds for the truth
of the judgment as sufficient. When these grounds are in the
judgment itself, or intrinsically connected with the judgment,
and are in the nature of reasons appealing solely to our intellects,
we are said commonly to "know" that the judgment is true.
When they are in the nature of authority we are said to " be-
lieve" that the judgment is true, and to "believe" the truth
embodied in it; but here, provided the grounds are sufficient for
a certain, i.e. a firm assent, and that we are not deceived, the
belief will be knowledge.
When the grounds are not in the nature of authority, nor yet,
on the other hand, purely intellectual and such as to compel our
assent, to amount to "demonstration," or admit of being stated
in purely intellectual terms, but are nevertheless such that from
their appeal to our whole mental nature, needs, and constitution,
—including intellect, will, and emotions,—we pronounce them to
be reasonably sufficient grounds for assenting to the judgment,—
in such cases also we are commonly said to "believe" the latter
to be true. Here, too, provided the grounds are sufficient, and
we are not deceived, our belief will be knowledge: it will be firm
adherence to a true judgment. Nevertheless, when we give
assents of this latter kind we are commonly said to "believe"
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY 29
rather than to "know" what is asserted in the judgments con-
cerned, just as in the case of assents given on authority. Thus
we are not only said to believe, e.g., that Socrates was put to death
by the Athenians, but also, e.g., that "our faculties are capable
of reaching truth," or that "truth and error are distinct and dis-
tinguishable," or that "Nature is uniform". The grounds for
such assents as these will be duly examined. Here we wish
merely to point out that it is a fairly common usage to group to-
gether assents based on authority, and assents based on grounds
not exclusively intellectual, but in part volitional, affective, emo-
tional, instinctive, and under the title of "belief" or "faith" to
distinguish them from the purely intellectual assents which are
supposed to give us "knowledge" or "science".
Seeing that the grounds for the classes of assents described
as "belief" are not so clear or cogent or capable of exact formu-
lation as the grounds for those described as "knowledge," it
should naturally be expected that the former term would gradually
come to be applied to assents that are not firm or certain, to
probable as distinct from certain knowledge, to opinion as distinct
from certitude. And such is the actual usage. Hence the com-
mon form of expression, "I do not know whether that is really
so, but I believe it is" (or " I think it is "), where the term "know"
connotes certain knowledge and the term " believe " (or "think ")
connotes belief in the sense of opinion or probable knowledge.
In this usage " belief" is distinguished from "knowledge" as
"opinion " from "certitude ".
Faith differs little in its meaning—or rather, in its meanings
—from "belief". As a mental act or attitude or habit it is
belief especially in religious truths on Divine authority. It is
used objectively to signify a whole body or system of dogmas
believed, just as the term "science" is used objectively to signify
a whole body or system of truths known. In this sense " faith"
is practically synonymous with "religion," and is distinguished
from "science," as belief is from knowledge. The distinction is
not one of opposition. The truths of faith and the truths of
science are both alike truths; and truth cannot contradict truth.
In so far as the assents of faith or religion are given to truths,
and on sufficient grounds, they embody knowledge, and the
systematization of such knowledge belongs to the science of
Theology—the Theology of Faith.
Of course there are multitudes who regard all religions
30
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
or faiths objectively as systems of beliefs or assents based on
instinctive, emotional needs, about matters concerning which
knowledge is considered impossible. But if the motives of such
assents are pronounced sufficient to produce certitude, when
submitted to the judgment of our reason reflecting on them, we
cannot help thinking that they are beliefs which give us knowledge,
or in other words put us into possession of truth. If, however,
the motives are not reasonably sufficient to produce certitude, then
in such case our "faith" or " religion" is only a system of more
or less probable opinions. The view that the assents of faith are
concerned with a domain of realities wholly distinct from the
domain of objects of knowledge we shall find to be erroneous.
It exaggerates and misinterprets the distinction which we do un-
doubtedly find between two great classes of our assents, namely,
those given on clear and cogent intellectual grounds to the de-
monstrated conclusions of the speculative sciences, and those
given from much more complex, personal, practical motives to
judgments of more intimate concern to the general outlook and
ordering of our lives.1
We have to bear in mind, then, that according to fairly
common usage the terms "belief" and "faith" are not confined
to assents given on authority, but embrace assents given to judg-
ments which we accept indeed as true but to which we assent on
grounds that are too complex to admit of being resolved into
purely intellectual reasons amounting to the demonstration or
the self-evidence deemed necessary for judgments constituting
"knowledge" or " science ".
When the judgments which we accept as true on authority
have an intimate practical bearing on our own future, as they
have in the case of supernatural religious beliefs, our assents are
accompanied by the mental attitude of expectation, anticipation,
hope, trust, confidence, reliance. The authority in whom we
"believe" or "have faith" not merely vouches for a truth but
makes a promise. Hence to "believe in " or to "have faith in"
a person, commonly implies not merely accepting his authority
for a truth but relying on his fidelity for the fulfilment of a pro-
mise. Faith in this sense of trust, or confidence, or reliance (L.
fiducid), implies not merely assent of the intellect to a truth but
a whole complex mental attitude,—involving the activity of will,
1 Cf. Newman's distinction between " notional " and " real" assents, Grammar
of Assent (passim).
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY 31
affections, emotions, etc.,—towards some person or persons as
related to ourselves and influencing our lives. In so far as faith
means merely assent to or belief in a truth, it is an act of the
intellect; in so far as it includes confidence, reliance, trust, etc.,
it is a much more complex mental process involving activities
other than cognitive activities. Cognition, knowledge, science
are processes and states of the mind as cognitive. Belief and
faith involve assent to, or acceptance of, the knowledge acquired
by these processes.
Let us see next what introspection reveals regarding the
various attitudes of our mind towards knowledge.
7. Doubt. Opinion. Conviction. Certitude.—It is a
common conviction of mankind that truth is distinguishable from
error. It is an equally common conviction that although men
easily fall into error, and easily remain in error, nevertheless they
can and do possess some true knowledge concerning themselves
and the universe. The human mind is recognized to be fallible
in that it can adhere to error, mistaking this for truth. It is also
recognized to be limited in its capacity inasmuch as no one be-
lieves that all reality falls within the experience of any individual
human being, and, therefore, there is much reality of which even
the wisest human being must remain in ignorance. Finally,
no human individual will claim that he fully understands all the
reality which does fall within his experience: he will admit that
there is much he is unable to interpret, unable to reach the truth
or make up his mind about, so that he must suspend his judg-
ment in reference to it and remain in doubt; and that there is
much, perhaps, too, in regard to which, while he has a more or
less strong opinion that he has reached the truth, still he is not
certain, not sure, not convinced that he has, and so recognizes the
possibility that he may be mistaken. But with all that,—at least
if he be an ordinary man and not a philosopher of a certain school,
—he will unhesitatingly declare and maintain that there are some
things, indeed many things, about which he is absolutely certain
that he has true knowledge, and in regard to which he is not and
could not have been deceived. Nor will the most sceptical philo-
sopher deny that all men, himself included, naturally and spon-
taneously have such convictions. What he may question or deny
is that any of these convictions are well grounded or will stand
the test of critical analysis. With that, however, we are not here
concerned, but merely with the fact that all men have spontaneous
32
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
convictions, i.e. are naturally certain that they possess some true
knowledge.
Let us now look into our own minds a little and examine
those mental attitudes of doubt, surmise, opinion (or "belief"), con-
viction, and certitude or certainty, in regard to our knowledge.
We are concerned at this stage only with noting the undisputed
facts which are the data of our inquiry, and the meaning of the
terms in which its problems will be stated.
Doubt1 is the attitude of our minds towards a judgment which
we find ourselves unable either to affirm or to deny: a state
of hesitancy, suspense. Either we know nothing or practically
nothing about the subject in question and have no grounds for
determining whether or not the suggested judgment about it is
true,—in which case our doubt is said to be negative,—or the
grounds for and against the judgment appear practically equal,
in which case the doubt is described as positive. In this latter
case we form judgments, of course, about the grounds, but in
neither case do we enunciate a judgment about the main subject
itself. We suspend our judgment.
Besides doubt, there is another state of uncertainty? viz.
opinion or " belief". This is the attitude of the mind towards a
judgment to which it inclines, and which it accepts and assents
to provisionally as more or less likely to be true, more or less
probable or "provable ". The mind does not know it to be true,
is not certain of its truth, is conscious that it may possibly be
false, and therefore does not assent to it firmly and definitively,
but accepts it only provisionally. The strength of the mind's
assent, of its .hold on such a judgment, may vary (with the
weight of the motives) from a mere suspicion or surmise of its
truth to a very steady adhesion whereby the mind accepts it—
as it prudently may accept it—for a safe principle or rule of
1 The etymology of the term reveals the oscillation of the mind between two
objects, between affirming and denying. It is from the same root (dub) as double
(dubius, dubitart). Cf. also the German zweifel (doubt) from zwei (two).
'Sometimes the term "doubt" is used as the contradictory of conviction or
certitude, as connoting merely the absence of the latter state, in which case it covers
both suspense of all assent (positive or negative doubt in the strict sense) and opinion
or probable assent. In this usage it is equivalent to "uncertainty ". Sometimes,
too, it is used in the wider and improper sense of positive disbelief in the truth of a
judgment, meaning a firm belief or conviction that the judgment is false. This, of
course, is not really a state of doubt or uncertainty but a state of conviction. The
student must, therefore, attend to the context for the meaning actually given to the
term.
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY
33
action.1 But even then there is the consciousness that in accept-
ing it there is a possibility—not a mere abstract possibility, but
a real and concrete possibility—of error. This concrete possibility
of error, when seen to persist, omnibus pensatis, begets in the
mind a fear of error, which the mind deems it prudent to enter-
tain, so that the mind does not repose in a definitive assent to the
judgment as true.
Over against these two states of uncertainty, and sharply con-
trasted with uncertainty, is the mental attitude of conviction, cer-
titude, certainty. Whereas the main affective characteristic of
uncertainty, and more especially of doubt, as a psychic state or
condition, is that of indetermination, unrest, instability, irksome-
ness, that of certitude2 is rest, repose, stability. For certitude is
the fixed or firm assent of the mind to a judgment as true. In this
state the mind reposes, convinced that it has attained its object,
that it is in possession of truth; whereas, while the mind is
doubting, or merely inclining to a judgment as probably true,
while it is still uncertain, while it is not sure, not convinced that
the judgment is true, it is not at rest but conscious that it has
still to work, to search, to examine, before it attains its object,
which is repose in the possession of truth.
So long as we entertain a prudent fear of error we have not
conviction or certitude. The factor of prudence refers, of course,
to our examination of the grounds and motives of our assent.
When we are conscious to ourselves that the grounds of our as-
sent are reasonably sufficient, in other words, when by a reason-
able consideration of them they show the judgment to be true, then and then only can we have conviction or certitude, then
alone can we say to ourselves, " I know that to be true". An
"imprudent fear of error" is a fear that it would be unreasonable
to entertain. If a person doubts merely because of such a fear
1 This very high degree of probability is commonly called "practical certitude,"
i.e. it is practically equivalent to certitude because men commonly act upon it in the
practical affairs of life. Hence the saying, Probability is the guide of life. When
we are not certain about the lawfulness of a given course of action, Moralists lay
down principles whereby we can overcome the speculative doubt and determine the
lawful line of conduct.
"The term certitude (cerium, for cretum, from cerno, npivtiv, Kpirr\s) is from
a root meaning to judge, decide, decree, pass sentence, after sifting, "discern-
ing" (dis-, cerno), examining, the evidence. It therefore implies decision, finality,
settlement. Sometimes a distinction is drawn between certitude as the state of
mind and certainty as the characteristic of the judgment, as when we say, " That is
a certainty ".
VOL. I. 3
34
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
it is because he misjudges it to be a prudent fear: if he considers
it an imprudent fear he will reject it and assent firmly, i.e. with
conviction or certitude, to the judgment in question. And while
he is certain and remains certain he may advert to several such
grounds of imprudent misgiving. It is about such that Newman
somewhere says "a hundred difficulties do not make one doubt".
Such vague and merely subjective misgivings as may arise from
the consciousness that we are not infallible, or from the remem-
brance that we have at times fallen into error, are not necessarily
incompatible with the fixed or firm assent which constitutes con-
viction. Men can and do retain multitudes of their spontaneous
convictions even after full advertence to, and consideration of,
their own mental limitations; and if some philosophers assert
that the process of testing critically the grounds of certitude has
ended for them in universal scepticism and destroyed their spon-
taneous convictions, this assertion only proves that like the rest
of mankind they too had such convictions.1 Nor has any one
ever seriously denied the existence of spontaneous or natural
certitude as a mental state distinct from that of doubt. The re-
cognition of the distinction is in fact the starting-point of all
critical inquiry into the validity of knowledge.
The distinction between opinion on the one hand and con-
viction or certitude on the other lies in the presence or absence
of a prudent fear of error. If such fear is present it arises from
the apprehended concrete possibility of error and impedes a firm
assent; if it is absent the assent is firm and amounts to convic-
tion or certitude.
It is a fact of common experience that according to the
weight of the motives for or against assent the mind may alter-
nate between the states of doubt, opinion, and conviction or
certitude in regard to the same judgment. The evidence for the
truth of a probable judgment may increase up to the point at
which all prudent fear of error is excluded, and at this point
opinion passes into conviction or certitude. It is of the essence
of opinion or probable assent that it admits of varying grades of
intensity.
Does conviction or certain assent also admit of varying
1 Even after theoretically rejecting these convictions as speculatively unjustifi-
able, sceptics nevertheless retain them as practical certitudes: they could not con-
tinue to live otherwise, for almost every act of man's daily life is based on such
convictions.
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY 35
degrees of firmness? The common usage of language will not
assist us materially in answering this question, for the terms in
which people describe the character of their assents do not indi-
cate any great accuracy or exactness of mental analysis. People
often say lightly, "I am sure," "I am quite certain," "I have no
doubt," etc., when a little reflection would convince them they
were not really sure at all. Indeed when a person vehemently
reasserts and reiterates that he is certain of a thing, this very fact
is a pretty sure sign that he is not without some misgiving as to
his position. Hence the assertion "I am more certain of this
than I am of that,"—which, though perhaps unusual, is not un-
heard of,—does not settle the question whether some certitudes
are really firmer than others.
It is obvious that on the negative side all certain assents must
equally exclude prudent fear of error. But while all have this
feature in common, may not some of them be positively firmer
than others? Introspection reveals this much at all events, that
there are some of my convictions which are never disturbed by
any fear of error inasmuch as I cannot conceive the possibility of
the judgments in question being erroneous, e.g., "two and two
are four"; and that there are other convictions of mine accom-
panied by the consciousness that they might possibly cease to be
convictions, or perhaps by the memory that they were at one
time only opinions or matters of doubt. Such for instance is my
conviction that without the aid of Divine Revelation it would be
morally impossible for the masses of mankind to reach and re-
tain the religious knowledge necessary for the guidance of their
lives in accordance with their nature and destiny. Such, too, are
the convictions we shall describe later (11) as "free convictions,"
—to which class belong most moral and religious beliefs. Intro-
spection, moreover, reveals that these latter alone are accompanied
by a fluctuating mass of volitional and emotional consciousness
arising from their intimate personal influence on our lives. While
the necessary assents which we give to speculative judgments on
cogent evidence are characterized by an absence of emotion, a
calmness and tranquillity, arising partly from the consciousness
that they are indubitable and partly from the consciousness that
they have no immediate practical bearing on the regulation of
our lives and conduct, the assents which we freely give to the
practical judgments of the other class are indeed firm, not how-
ever with the immovable and unassailable fixity of assents on
36
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGE
cogent evidence, but with a steadfastness begotten of mental
effort; and while we hold these so firmly that we may be pre-
pared even to die rather than relinquish them, still we are con-
scious that they are exposed in our minds to the possibility of
being shaken by the intrusion of fears, by suggestions of reasons
for doubting, etc.,—though we see the imprudence of yielding to
such suggestions, of entertaining such fears, of fostering such
temptations.
It is perhaps on this account that at first sight we are in-
clined to say that the former certitudes are "firmer" than the
latter. Reflection, however, while revealing profound differences
between the total mental state in each case, does not corroborate
the view that our assent to such a judgment, as, for instance,
"the human soul is immortal," is one whit less firm,—provided
we are convinced, and as long as we are convinced, of its truth,—
than is our assent to such a judgment as "the whole is greater
than its part". Provided I am convinced of the truth of both,
i.e. provided I know for certain, or think that I know for certain,
that both are true, then I hold them equally for true. My mental
grasp is de facto equally firm in both cases, though I am quite
conscious that in the one case I am exposed to mental influences
which might possibly have the effect of loosening my grasp while
in the other case I am not aware that any such influences are even
possible.
8. Cognitive and Non-cognitive States of Conscious-
ness. Consciousness, Knowledge, and Objectivity.—Those
states—of doubt, opinion, conviction, certitude—are, it need
hardly be pointed out, cognitive states, states of the mind as cog-
nitive, attitudes of the mind towards knowledge. The mind has
other conscious states and activities which are not cognitive:
wishes, desires, decisions, or choices, appetitive movements of
various kinds, emotional and passional affections and feelings
such as joy, anger, fear, pleasure, melancholy, etc. About all
such states two things here claim our notice.
Firstly: they are all distinct from the states mentioned above.
Although volitional and emotional factors can and often do enter
into the motives which produce the states of doubt, opinion, con-
viction, or certitude, nevertheless these states are attitudes of the
mind towards knowledge and truth: they are all concerned with
assent to, or acceptance of, judgments as true, as embodying
knowledge. They all refer the mind to an object made present
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY
37
to the mind by the state or process of cognition itself. The other
states and processes do not of themselves refer the mind to any-
thing beyond themselves. Considered in themselves, apart from
the cognitions out of which they may have arisen and by which
they are generally accompanied, they are merely mental facts, of
which the mind as a conscious subject is aware.
Secondly: although, therefore, they are not cognitive states
they are conscious states: they are states of consciousness, of
appetitive, volitional, emotional consciousness, as distinct from
cognitive consciousness. All states of consciousness, all con-
scious acts or processes, have this in common, that they make
the conscious being somehow aware of himself in the concrete, of
himself as living, doing, suffering, experiencing something: other-
wise he would not be conscious. But this awareness, which is of
the essence of all conscious activity, need not necessarily be of
anything but the vaguest and most indefinite character. It does
not necessarily imply the possession, by the conscious being, of
any idea of "self" or "other," or even a conscious distinction,
on the part of the conscious being, between himself and that of
which he is conscious. Such an explicit awareness of the " self"
as affected by conscious states, or as distinct from other beings,
implies the exercise of introspection or reflex consciousness,1 and
of the faculty of comparing, distinguishing, judging, i.e. it in-
volves interpretation and therefore cognition in the strict sense.
The simple awareness which is essential to direct consciousness
even in its most rudimentary stage, involves none of all this.
Although, therefore, direct consciousness may be called "cog-
nition" or "knowledge" in a wide and loose sense, it is not
knowledge properly speaking. It is of course an essential con-
dition of the cognitive process, and may be regarded as an initial
stage of this latter. But cognition or knowledge proper is the
interpretation of something, the mental assertion of something
about something.
The mere presentation of something to a conscious being, and
1 Psychologists are wont to puzzle over the question, how the mind can act
consciously and at the same time by a reflex process watch or attend to its direct
conscious processes: some arguing that what really happens is that the direct process
when just past is immediately recalled or represented, that " all introspection is re-
trospection "; others arguing that " all retrospection is introspection," inasmuch as
when the mind does remember or recall a past process it must, while reproducing it,
at that instant also attend to it. However it happens, the possibility of introspec-
tion is proved by the fact of introspection: about the fact there can be no dispute.
3»
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
its consequent presence in or to or before1 the mind of such a being,
are not yet knowledge. It is only when the mind re-views or re-
presents to itself the already present or presented something, and
makes some mental assertion which in some way interprets this
"something," that the mind begins to have knowledge (or pos-
sibly error) about it. In this process of interpretation or judg-
ment,—the exercise of which implies, as we shall see, some degree
of mental development by which the mind through sense per-
ception has acquired a stock of notions or concepts utilized in
judging,—the mind characterizes in some way what has been
presented to it, makes it to some extent definite, in some sense
classifies it. Hence it has been said that "all cognition is recog-
nition ": i.e. all cognition in the strict sense, in the sense in which
it attains to truth or involves error.
Hence mere sense perception, whereby through the function-
ing of the sense faculties we become aware of something con-
sciously affecting us in one or other of the modes with which
sense experience has familiarized us, is not knowledge proper—of
itself and apart from the interpretation that as a rule implicitly
accompanies it. As interpreted, it is no longer mere perception
but apperception, to use this term in one of its many meanings.2 As apperception, it is knowledge proper and must be either
true or false. But as perception merely, it rather is or gives the
raw material of knowledge. Hence, too, mere mental imagery
is not of itself cognition, nor can the images formed by the con-
structive or reproductive exercise of the imagination be regarded
as knowledge; though the interpretation of them is knowledge.
Hence, finally, mere intellectual conception, whereby we form
the abstract and universal concepts, notions, or ideas expressed by
abstract and general logical terms, is not cognition or knowledge,
—apart from the interpretation or judgment which accompanies
it. Neither of sense percepts, nor of imagination images, nor of
intellectual concepts, nor of the logical terms which express in
language those mental factors of knowledge, can it be properly
said that they are either "true" or " false ".
No doubt these products or results of conscious activity are
factors of knowledge. All of them have that peculiar character-
istic which marks off cognition from other forms of conscious
1 These prepositions have of course in the above and similar contexts no local
or spatial significance.
1 Cf. Maher, Psychology, 5th edit., pp. 359-60.
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY 39
activity, viz. the objective reference of the mind as conscious sub-
ject to a something as distinct from the mental process whereby
this " something" is made present to the mind as conscious. Ex-
ternal sense perception refers us to a perceived material universe
as distinct from our minds; the organic sense refers us to states
of an organism felt as our own, yet distinct from our process of
feeling; abstract concepts (and the logical terms which express
them) refer us to a domain not identical with, but objective to,
the thought-process of conception itself.1 But while this objec-
tive reference is indeed there in all those cognitive states and
processes, it is not and cannot be interpreted and asserted to be
a valid reference to reality except in the mental act of judgment.
It is only the copula of the logical judgment that asserts the ob-
jects of this mental reference to be reality, and the relation be-
tween mind and reality involved in this reference to be true or
objectively valid knowledge. We may say, then, that all cogni-
tive states or processes of consciousness have, in virtue of their
natural objective reference, an interpretative objectivity, but that
in judgment alone we have that consciously asserted objectivity
(of the mental state as representative of reality) whereby the
judgment is true or false?
9. Truth. Error. Ignorance.—By knowledge simply we
mean true knowledge. The absence of knowledge in a subject
deemed capable of possessing knowledge we designate ignorance.
The absence of knowledge in a subject not deemed capable of
possessing knowledge, e.g. in a stick or a stone, we do not speak
of as ignorance; we may describe it as nescience. Knowledge
proper is embodied in the mental act of assertion or denial, in
the judgment. So long as we abstain from judging we cannot
err; but when we judge, our judgment must be either true or
false. We never consciously assent to a judgment, i.e. accept it
as true, as knowledge, if we know it to be false; indeed we can-
not do so except through momentary inadvertence, and therefore
unconsciously. But we can and do accept as true judgments
which are really false,—thinking them, of course, to be true.
When we accept a false or erroneous judgment as true we are
in error. As we afterwards say when we discover our mistake:
we thought we knew but in reality we did not; we thought
we had knowledge but we really had not; we were farther re- 1 Cf. Science of Logic, i. pp. 248-52.
2 Cf. Jbanniere, Criteriologia, pp. 78-9.
40
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
moved from the possession of truth or true knowledge than if
we had been merely in ignorance or in doubt, for we were in
error.
Now what is this TRUTH to which knowledge lays claim, and
failing which it is not knowledge at all but error? Well, what-
ever truth and error respectively may prove to be in the sequel,
this much at all events is certain, that men universally believe
truth and error to be distinct, and therefore distinguishable, and
to be mutually exclusive opposites. This common conviction is
one of the data of our general inquiry. And its existence im-
plies that the broad conception or meaning attached to each of
those two terms is familiar to, and understood by, men generally.
What, then, do men generally mean by truth? They mean the
conformity of thought with thing, the agreement of their knowledge
with reality, the correspondence or concord of their judgments with
the real state of things, the fidelity of their knowledge to facts.
And by error they mean the exact opposite of all this, the discord
of their judgment with facts, the disconformity of their supposed
knowledge with reality, the disagreement of what they think to
be with what really is. These are undoubtedly the notions which
convey what men generally mean by truth and error respectively;
and we have purposely varied the expressions in italics in order
to bring out the common notions themselves underlying the varied
expressions. Whether truth and error are really what these
notions represent them to be, will appear in the sequel. We
hope later by gradual explanation of them to show that they are
valid notions. But whether these traditional and what we may
call spontaneous conceptions of truth and error are correct or not,
there is no denying the fact that they are the conceptions univer-
sally entertained by mankind. Even the small minority consist-
ing of those philosophers who think this common view of truth
and error indefensible—even they entertained this very view be-
fore they became so sophisticated as to reject it as untenable.
When reality is as we "think," i.e. judge, it to be, then and then
only does our "thinking" or judging deserve to be called "know-
ing"; then and then only is it true: when reality is otherwise,
then is our "thinking" or judging false, then it is no longer
"knowing" but, so to speak, wz/j-knowing, mis-judging, falling
into error. Such, then, is what men ordinarily understand by
truth and error. And we have seen that all men have spontane-
ous convictions: they are certain that they know some truths,
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY 41
i.e. that some of their judgments are certainly in conformity with
facts, with reality.
Every judgment to which we assent with certitude is accom-
panied, in the very act of mentally asserting it (" in actu exercito"
as the technical language of the schools has it), by an implicit
"I know". Every judgment asserted as true implicitly an-
nounces its own truth. If, over and above this, we reflect on the
judgment and by a distinct mental act assert its truth, we are
said to become explicitly aware of its truth and to know the
latter "in actu signato ".
Are we justified in regarding truth or true knowledge as a
conformity of our judgments with reality, a conformity whereby
we get a genuine insight into reality as it is? Are we justified
in entertaining the spontaneous conviction or certitude that we
have any such knowledge? These are the main problems that
confront us. So far we have been merely observing the terms
and the data of such problems. It is clear that their solution
can be arrived at only by a searching analysis of our cognitive
processes and states,—supplemented for each individual inquirer
by his observing, and noticing the significance of, what others
spontaneously believe in regard to their capacity for, and pro-
gress in, the discovery of truth. St. Thomas, in a remarkable
passage in the Quaestiones Disputatae, insists on the need of this
introspection for what we may call a reasoned and certain know-
ledge of truth, implying that this introspection will confirm our
fundamental natural conviction that it is the very nature of the
mind to know reality. "We have certain knowledge of the
truth," he says, "inasmuch as (1) we attain to truth by an act of
the intellect, and (2) we know that we do so. We attain to truth
by an operation of the intellect inasmuch as the judgment of the
intellect gives us an insight into reality as it is. And we know,
that it does so by reflecting on that operation and seeing not
merely that the judgment is formed, but that it is conformed to
the reality. But to see that the conformity is there we must
understand the nature of the act of judgment; which in turn can
be known only by knowing the nature of the principle whence it
springs; and this principle is the intellect itself, the nature of
which is to conform itself to reality. Hence the intellect knows
that it possesses truth by reflecting on itself." 1
1 The following is the passage freely rendered in the text. We have italicized
the phrases implying the conviction that the mind can know reality as it is:—
"Veritas est in intellect!) . . . sicut consequens actum intellectus, et sicut cog- 42
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
In searching out the data of our inquiries it is lawful for each
of us to supplement introspection by observing the common con-
victions and beliefs of his fellow-men,—provided these convictions
and beliefs are simply noted as facts. Of course the assumption
by each individual inquirer that they are facts for him seems
to imply the validity of his own conviction that he has fellow-
inquirers distinct from himself, and that there is distinct from his
own mind a real world in which he and they exist in common.
But this conviction of his does not really prejudge the nature of
the relation between his own mind on the one hand and the reality
of the world and his fellow-men on the other. In so far as this
conviction is a belief that the world and his fellow-men have a
real existence distinct from, and independent of, his knowledge
of them, it is a provisional belief which he can hold himself pre-
pared to review with critical impartiality. But that the world
and his fellow-men are undeniable facts which enter into his
mental experience—this is not an assumption but a fundamental
datum which he can and must take as a starting-point. The con-
tention, which seems to have been fostered by Descartes and
Kant, that when an individual in mature life undertakes the criti-
cal investigation of the possibility and validity of human know-
ledge and certitude he must discard all previous experience and
all presuppositions, set out with the conception of a pure thinking
entity thus reduced to a tabula rasa or pure potentiality, and en-
deavour to discover how such an entity can gain any knowledge
or experience whatever,—such a contention, if strictly adhered to,
as of course it never has been in fact, would paralyse all effort to
criticize knowledge by leaving nothing to investigate. Deferring
this for further elucidation when we come to deal with doubt as
a method, let us here pursue somewhat further the psychological
nita per intellectum; consequitur namque intellectus operationem secundum quod
judicium intellectus est de re secundum quod est; cognoscitur autem ab intellectu
secundum quod intellectus reflectitur super suum actum, non solum secundum quod
cognoscit actum suum, sed secundum quod cognoscit proportionem ejus ad rem:
quod quidem cognosci non potest, nisi cognoscatur natura ipsius actus, quae cog-
nosci non potest nisi cognoscatur natura principii activi, quod est ipse intellectus, in
cujus natura est quod rebus conformetur: unde secundum hoc cognoscit veritatem
intellectus quod supra seipsum reflectitur."—De Veritate, i., 9. When he says that
we cannot know the nature of the act of judgment unless through knowledge of the
nature of the intellect, he refers of course to a synthetic knowledge by "causal"
demonstration [cf. Science of Logic, ii., §§ 252-4]. Our knowledge of the nature of
intellect, as of any faculty, can be reached only through observation of, and reason-
ing from, its operations.
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY
investigation by which we have already noted some of the most
elementary data concerning truth and the mind's spontaneous
convictions in regard to the possession of truth.
10. Faculties and Sources of Knowledge. Classifica-
tion of Spontaneous Convictions.—A general glance at the
faculties by the exercise of which men acquire what they believe
to be certain knowledge will enable us to reach at least a rough
classification of those spontaneous convictions. By means of our
external senses,—sight, hearing, taste, smell, touch,—we have
revealed to us certain data which are, so to speak, the raw
materials of our knowledge of an external material universe. Then
we have the internal sense of organic touch whereby we are made
aware of what we interpret to be states or conditions of our own
bodies. Furthermore we have the faculties of memory and im-
agination whereby we recall past experiences, compound and
construct mental images, associate and co-ordinate mental states
according to laws discovered and formulated by psychologists.
Finally we have the faculty of thinking, in the stricter sense, i.e.
of forming the intellectual concepts or notions expressed in language
by abstract and general logical terms, of interpreting or judging
all the data of conscious experience by means of those concepts,
of reasoning from those interpretations and so making progress
in knowledge. For the present we assume nothing and assert
nothing as to the nature of those processes or the ultimate origin
of the data with which they are concerned. We simply observe
by introspection the fact that not merely have we sense percep-
tions, imagination images, processes of memory and mental as-
sociation, but also that we have a fund of intellectual concepts
or notions; that we take these notions as representing aspects of
reality; that by means of them we interpret the data of our sense
perceptions which we likewise believe to be perceptions of reality;
that by the mental analysis and synthesis involved in judgment
and reasoning we think we reach some true and certain know-
ledge of reality.
Now while all the other cognitive processes lead up to know-
ledge, it is in the mental act of judgment, of affirming or denying,
that knowledge is formally contained. Can we reach any classi-
fication of knowledge, i.e. of our judgments, on the basis of the
sources whence their contents are immediately derived, or which
comes to the same thing—of the processes which immediately sub-
serve the formation of them?
44
THEOR Y OF KNO WLEDGR
(1) In the first place we have immediate judgments of sense
perception, judgments whereby we interpret individual facts of
internal or external sense experience, as " I am writing," "it is
raining," "this is a shilling," "that is the sound of the night mail
passing". Such judgments are all singular and contingent; they
assert the real existence or happening of some individual con-
tingent thing or event; or characterize it in some way. Hence
we may also call them judgments of identification, designation,
classification,—whereby we recognize certain attributes as char-
acterizing individual things or events and designate these ac-
cordingly. They are synthetic judgments, i.e. the information
given by such judgments is derived not from any analysis of
our concept of their respective subjects, but from experience.
In fact the only concept we have of the subject, as such, is
the concept of "this being, thing, or event": "hoc aliquid";
roSe tL
They give rise to the broad critical question of the trustworthiness, or the
proper interpretation, of the data of sense experience; and also to the ques-
tion: What relation does the content of our universal concepts bear to the
data of our sense experience?
(2) Secondly, we have immediate judgments derived from ana-
lysis and comparison of abstract ideas, as "the whole is greater
than its part," "two and two are four," "a judgment cannot be
both true and false," " injustice is wrong," " virtue is praiseworthy ".
Like those of the previous class, such judgments also appear to
be immediately evident, but unlike the former they seem to be
necessarily and therefore also universally true: they are analytic,
for the relation between predicate and subject is seen, by analysis
of these latter, to arise necessarily from a comparison of them.
They are called axioms or first principles. The existence of such
a class of judgment is undisputed, though there has been much
controversy as to whether such or such a judgment,—e.g. "What-
ever happens has a cause "; "the course of Nature is uniform,"—
belongs to this class. Likewise their necessary character, their
power of compelling our intellectual assent, is undisputed, though
the nature and origin of this necessity are variously explained.
Moreover, the significance of such judgments, or in other words
the question: What insight, if any, do such abstract, necessary,
and universal judgments give us into reality?—will also have to be
examined.
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY 45
They reveal to the mind a system or domain of thought-objects, within
which such necessary relations seem to hold sway. Is this domain real t If
not, then no knowledge of reality seems possible: for all science and know-
ledge, all reasoning and judging, involve such principles.1 U the domain of
these abstract thought-objects and the relations between them be real, then
how is it related to the data revealed in sense experience ?—the question of
"universals" under another form.
(3) Thirdly, we have mediate judgments derived by deductive
reasoning from those of the preceding class. The conclusions
of the pure mathematical sciences are the best example of such
judgments: e.g. "the three interior angles of any plane triangle
are equal to two right angles". The faculty of apprehending
the principles belonging to the preceding class is called intelligence
or intellect; the faculty of deriving from them the conclusions
belonging to the present class is called reason. In both classes
the mind is contemplating what we may call pure or abstract
thought-objects or essences, and the relations between such, with-
out any immediate or direct reference of them to what we may
describe as the domain of concrete existences and happenings
revealed in sense experience; whereas in judgments of class (1)
we are explicitly interpreting these concrete existences and
happenings. If we designate these latter judgments as truths of
the real order, and judgments about abstract thought-objects or
essences as truths of the ideal order, we must not be understood
as prejudging in any way the validity of either class of judgments
as conveying to our minds a genuine knowledge of reality. Con-
clusions reached by deductive reasoning, in the pure or abstract
sciences, from the principles referred to in class (2) imply of
1 Even the elementary contingent judgment, such as " I am writing," yields in-
telligible knowledge only by its embodying in itself the principles of identity and
contradiction, and these principles appear to be necessarily and universally true.
Furthermore, an admitted characteristic of scientific knowledge is that it is know-
ledge of necessary and universal judgments, whether these be first principles or de-
rived conclusions. Are such judgments interpretations of reality? Are they
interpretations of the data of sense experience, and does this latter reveal reality?
How can a human being who is himself a contingent individual, and whose existence
appears to be limited in time and space, attain to judgments which appear to be true
necessarily and universally for all time and space, or rather independently of all
time and space, and which appear also to give him genuine knowledge of reality?
Are time and space then real? Are the data of our sense experience, which are in-
terpreted by us to be temporal and spatial,—are they really temporal and spatial?
Or is that alone real which is revealed to us through necessary and universal judg-
ments,— i.e. the domain of static, purely intellectual thought-objects with their
eternal and immutable relations? These are some of the questions which a more
mature reflection on our cognitive processes has repeatedly suggested for solution—
as far as solution may be possible—to the inquiring mind.
46
THEORY OF KNOWLEDGE
course for their own validity not only the validity of the prin-
ciples from which they are inferred but also that of the formal or
logical principles of deductive reasoning according to which they
are inferred.
(4) Fourthly, we have what we may call judgments of gener-
alization or induction, whereby we transcend by thought the
limits of our past and present sense experience and assert that
what we have found to be true of all experienced instances of
some thing or event is likewise true of the unexperienced in-
stances, and of all possible instances, of that thing or event.
The judgments of classes (2) and (3) we saw to be universal be-
cause necessary: "All wholes are greater than their parts because
the whole as such is necessarily greater than its part". "All
plane triangles have the sum of their interior angles equal to two
right angles because this is necessarily true of the plane triangle
as such." Now we encounter another class of universal judg-
ments which are reached not by analysis and comparison of
abstract concepts, or deductive reasoning from the necessary
principles revealed by such analysis and comparison, but by
a process of generalizing from actually experienced facts—not,
however, without the aid of some "necessary" principles. These
universal judgments, thus reached by inductive generalization,
refer to, and are concerned with, what we have called the real
order, the domain of the concrete things and events revealed
through sense experience. And it needs but little reflection to
convince us what a very considerable proportion of our knowledge
has been reached by each of us through this generalizing process.
It is not merely the inductive scientist who employs it. He does
so in the most careful manner according to the canons of in-
ductive logic; but every human individual employs it in a quasi-
instinctive, rough and ready way from the time he reaches the
use of reason. By means of it, for instance, Newton discovered
the law of universal gravitation; but no less by means of it have
we all learned that fire burns, that unsupported bodies fall to
the earth, that food nourishes, that living things are born and
die, that where only oats are sown we cannot reap wheat,
that children imitate the example of their elders, etc., etc. By
means of it we acquire some knowledge of the characteristic
properties of the classes of things and events revealed in sense
experience, and thence of their natures and modes of behaviour,
and of the causes and conditions of their existence and occur-
THE TERMS AND DATA OF THE INQUIRY
47
rence. Thus we are led1 from acquaintance with directly per-
ceptible realities to the intellectual apprehension or discovery of
realities that are not themselves perceptible by the senses,—from
effects to causes, from actions to agents, from conduct to nature,
from singular to universal.
Now the process of reaching such universal judgments from
particular sense experiences involves on our part the tacit ac-
ceptance or assumption of the validity of this general principle:
that Nature is uniform in its modes of existence and action; that
the world of which we have experience is not chaotic, capricious,
unreliable, but orderly, regular, reliable; that it is, so to speak,
"of a piece" within and without our experience, so that from the
former portion we can learn about the latter; that the domain of
our experience, which we find to be in some measure intelligible,
to admit of rational interpretation and explanation up to the
limits of the cognitive powers of our finite minds, is the real uni-
verse, and is verily as our knowledge represents it to be, so far as
our knowledge of it goes.
Whether or in what sense this conviction of ours is based upon our actual
experience; whether or in what sense it is a necessary presupposition for
having intelligible experience; whether or how far it springs from an instinct
of our nature as intelligent or rational; whether the conviction is validly ap-
plicable to the real universe, or only to the domain of appearances or phe-
nomena within the individual mind; what is the exact scope or extent of the
domain to which it does apply; on what rational grounds is it ultimately
justifiable,—these are some of the critical questions to which reflection on this
conviction naturally gives rise." And reflection will also suggest that this
conviction is perhaps inseparably bound up with our spontaneous belief that
on the one hand the real world is knowable or intelligible, and that on the
other hand our minds are capable of attaining to some true and certain
knowledge concerning it.
Judgments reached by inductive generalization from sense
experience present themselves to our minds as distinct from those
ofclass(i)in that the latter are singular while the former are
universal; but both classes alike are synthetic judgments. Those
of the present class likewise differ from the judgments of classes
(2) and (3) inasmuch as they do not present themselves to the
1 Or think we are led—from what we think to be realities—to what we think to
be other realities. The validity of this spontaneous thinking is at the present stage
an open question;
"For a detailed treatment of some of those questions, cf. Science of Logic, ii.,
Part IV., chap. iv.; Part V.,chap. i.
